The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Gathering of Brother Hilarius, by Michael
Fairless


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Gathering of Brother Hilarius


Author: Michael Fairless



Release Date: November 11, 2014  [eBook #789]
[This file was first posted on January 25, 1997]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GATHERING OF BROTHER
HILARIUS***


Transcribed from the 1912 John Murray edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

FIRST EDITION,                 _October_ 1901.
Reprinted,                     _January_ 1902.
Reprinted,                     _January_ 1903.
Reprinted,                     _January_ 1905.
Reprinted,                      _August_ 1908.
Reprinted,                      _August_ 1910.
POPULAR EDITION, (1/-)        _February_ 1912.

                             THE GATHERING OF
                             BROTHER HILARIUS


                           By MICHAEL FAIRLESS
                        AUTHOR OF “THE ROADMENDER”

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                  LONDON
                      JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET
                                   1912

                                * * * * *

                               A. M. D. G.

    “To those dearworthy ones
       to whom I owe all;
    I give that which is theirs already.”

                                * * * * *




PREFACE


THROUGH this little book runs the road of life, the common road of men,
the white highway that Hilarius watched from the monastery gate and
Brother Ambrose saw nearing its end in the Jerusalem of his heart.

The book is a romance.  It may be read as a romance of the Black Death
and a monk with an artist’s eyes; but for the author it is a romance of
the Image of God.  While the Divine Face is being unveiled for Hilarius
in the masque that shocks and bewilders him, and the secret of sorrow and
sin, of death and life and love, is told by his speechless and dying
“little maid,” we, if we choose, may hear again the Road mender’s
epilogue to the story of the man of this earth, the man of the common
highway:—“‘Dust and ashes and a house of devils,’ he cries; and there
comes back for answer, ‘_Rex concupiscet decorem tuum_.’”




CONTENTS

                               _PART I_
                               THE SEED
CHAP.                                                             PAGE
       I.  BLIND EYES IN THE FOREST                                  3
      II.  THE LOVE OF PRIOR STEPHEN                                15
     III.  THE KING’S SONG-BIRD                                     22
                              _PART II_
                              THE FLOWER
       I.  THE CITY OF PURE GOLD                                    39
      II.  THE CITY THAT HILARIUS SAW                               49
     III.  A SENDING FROM THE LORD                                  55
      IV.  BLIND EYES WHICH COULD SEE                               64
       V.  THE WHITE WAY AND WHERE IT LED                           72
      VI.  A DARK FINDING                                           82
     VII.  THE COMING OF HUNGER AND LOVE                            97
                              _PART III_
                              THE FRUIT
       I.  HOW LONG, O LORD, HOW LONG!                             117
      II.  MARY’S LILIES                                           124
     III.  OPEN EYES AT THE GATE                                   133
      IV.  THE PASSING OF PRIOR STEPHEN                            141
       V.  “GABRIEL, MAKE THIS MAN TO UNDERSTAND THE               147
           VISION.”—DAN. viii. 16.
      VI.  THE HUNGER OF DICKON THE WOODMAN                        154
     VII.  THE VISION OF THE EVENING AND THE MORNING               160
    VIII.  “BEHOLD THE FIELDS ARE WHITE”                           165




_PART I_
THE SEED


CHAPTER I
BLIND EYES IN THE FOREST


HILARIUS stood at the Monastery gate, looking away down the smooth,
well-kept road to the highway beyond.  It lay quiet and serene in the
June sunshine, the white way to the outer world, and not even a dust
cloud on the horizon promised the approach of the train of sumpter mules
laden with meats for the bellies and cloth for the backs of the good
Brethren within.  The Cellarer lacked wine, the drug stores in the
farmery were running low; last, but not least, the Precentor had bespoken
precious colours, rich gold, costly vellum, and on these the thoughts of
Hilarius tarried with anxious expectation.

On his left lay the forest, home of his longing imaginings.  The
Monastery wall crept up one side of it, and over the top the great trees
peered and beckoned with their tossing, feathery branches.  Twice had
Hilarius walked there, attending the Prior as he paced slowly and
silently along the mossy ways, under the strong, springing pines; and the
occasions were stored in his memory with the glories of St Benedict’s Day
and Our Lady’s Festivals.  Away to the right, within the great enclosure,
stretched the Monastery lands, fair to the eye, with orchard and fruitful
field, teeming with glad, unhurried labour.

At a little elevation, overlooking the whole domain, rose the Priory
buildings, topped by the Church, crown and heart of the place, signing
the sign of the Cross over the daily life and work of the Brethren,
itself the centre of that life, the object of that work, ever unfinished
because love knows not how to make an end.  To the monks it was a page in
the history of the life of the Order, written in stone, blazoned with
beauty of the world’s treasure; a page on which each generation might
spell out a word, perchance add a line, to the greater glory of God and
St Benedict.  They were always at work on it, stretching out eager hands
for the rare stuffs and precious stones devout men brought from overseas,
finding a place for the best of every ordered craft; their shame an
uncouth line or graceless arch, their glory each completed pinnacle and
fretted spire; ever restoring, enlarging, repairing, spendthrift of money
and time in the service of the House of the Lord.

The sun shone hot on grey wall and green garth; the spirit of insistent
peace brooded over the place.  The wheeling white pigeons circling the
cloister walls cried peace; the sculptured saints in their niches over
the west door gave the blessing of peace; an old, blind monk crossed the
garth with the hesitating gait of habit lately acquired—on his face was
great peace.  It rested everywhere, this peace of prayerful service,
where the clang of the blacksmith’s hammer smote the sound of the Office
bell.

Hilarius, at the gate, questioned the road again and again for sign of
the belated train.  It was vexatious; the Prior’s lips would take a
thinner line, for the mules were already some days overdue; and it was
ill to keep the Prior waiting.  The soft June wind swept the fragrance of
Mary’s lilies across to the lad; he turned his dreamy, blue eyes from the
highway to the forest.  The scent of the pinewoods rushed to meet his
sudden thought.  Should he, dare he, break cloister, and taste the
wondrous delight of an unwalled world?  It were a sin, a grave sin, in a
newly-made novice, cloister-bred.  The sweet, pungent smell overpowered
him; the trees beckoned with their long arms and slender fingers; the
voice of the forest called, and Hilarius, answering, walked swiftly away,
with bowed head and beating heart, between the sunburnt pine-boles.

At last he ventured to stop and look around him, his fair hair aflame in
the sunlight, his eyes full of awe of this arched and pillared city of
mystery and wonder.

It was very silent.  Here and there a coney peeped out and fled, and a
woodpecker toiled with sharp, effective stroke.  Hilarius’ eyes shone as
he lifted his head and caught sight of the sunlit blue between the great,
green-fringed branches: it was as if Our Lady trailed her gracious robe
across the tree-tops.  Then, as he bathed his thirsty soul in the great
sea of light and shade, cool depths and shifting colours, the sense of
his wrong-doing slipped from him, and joy replaced it—joy so great that
his heart ached with it.  He went on his way, singing _Lauda Syon_, his
eyes following the pine-boles, and presently, coming out into an open
glade, halted in amazement.

A flower incarnate stood before him; stood—nay, danced in the wind.  Over
the sunny sward two little scarlet-clad feet chased each other in
rhythmic maze; dainty little brown hands spread the folds of the deep
blue skirt; a bodice, silver-laced, served as stalk, on which balanced,
lightly swaying, the flower of flowers itself.  Hilarius’ eyes travelled
upwards and rested there.  Cheeks like a sunburnt peach, lips, a scarlet
bow; shimmering, tender, laughing grey eyes curtained by long curling
lashes; soft tendrils of curly hair, blue black in the shadows, hiding
the low level brow.  A sight for gods, but not for monks; above all, not
for untutored novices such as Hilarius.

His sin had found him out; it was the Devil, the lovely lady of St
Benedict; he drew breath and crossed himself hastily with a murmured
“_Apage Sataas_!”

The dancer stopped, conscious perhaps of a chill in the wind.

“O what a pretty boy!” she cried gaily.  “Playing truant, I dare wager.
Come and dance!”

Hilarius crimsoned with shame and horror.  “Woman,” he said, and his
voice trembled somewhat, “art thou not shamed to deck thyself in this
devil’s guise?”

The dancer bit her lip and stamped her little red shoe angrily.

“No more devil’s guise than thine own,” she retorted, eyeing his
semi-monastic garb with scant favour.  “Can a poor maid not practise her
steps in the heart of a forest, but a cloister-bred youngster must cry
devil’s guise?”

As she spoke her anger vanished like a summer cloud, and she broke into
peal on peal of joyous laughter.  “Poor lad, with thy talk of devils;
hast thou never looked a maid in the eyes before?”

Shrewdly hit, mistress; never before has Hilarius looked a maid in the
eyes, and now he drops his own.

“Dost thou not know it is sin to deck the body thus, and entice men’s
souls to their undoing?”

“An what is the matter with my poor body, may it please you, kind sir?”
she asked demurely, and stood with downcast eyes, like a scolded child.

“It is wrong to deck the body,” began Hilarius, softening at her
attitude, “because, because—”

Again the merry laugh rang out.

“Because, because—nay, Father” (with a mock reverence), “methinks thy
sermon is not ready; let it simmer awhile, and _I_ will catechise.  How
old art thou?”  She held up her small finger admonishingly.

“Seventeen,” replied Hilarius, surprised into reply.

“Art thou a monk?”

“Nay, a novice only.”

“Hast thou ever loved?”

Hilarius threw up his hands in shocked indignation, but she went on
unconcerned—

“’Twas a foolish question; the answer’s writ large for any maid to read.
But tell me, why art thou angry at the thought of love?”

Hilarius felt the ground slipping from under his feet.

“There is an evil love, and a holy love; it is good to love God and the
Saints and the Brethren—”

“But not the sisters?” the wicked little laugh pealed out.  “Poor
sisters!  Why, boy, the world is full of love, and not all for the Saints
and the Brethren, and it is good—good—good!”  She opened her arms wide.
“’Tis the devil and the monks who call it evil.  Hast thou never seen the
birds mate in the springtime, nor heard the nightingale sing?”

“It is well for a husband to love his wife, and a mother her child.  That
is love in measure, but not so high as the love we bear to God and the
Saints!” quoth Hilarius sententiously, mindful of yesterday’s homily in
the Frater.

“But how can’st thou know that thou lovest the Saints?” the dancer
persisted.

How did he know?

“How dost thou know that thou lovest thy mother?” he cried triumphantly,
forgetting the reprobate nature of the catechist, and anxious only to
come well out of the wordy war.

But the unexpected happened.

“Dost thou dare speak to me of my mother?  _I_, love her?—I _hate_ her;”
and she flung herself down on the grass in a passion of weeping.

Even a master of theology is helpless before a woman’s tears.

“Maid, maid,” said Hilarius, in deep distress, “indeed I did not mean to
vex thee;” and he came up and laid his hand on her shoulder.

So successfully can the Prince of Darkness simulate grief!

The dancer sat up and brushed away her tears; she looked fairer and more
flowerlike than before, sitting on the green sward, looking up at him
through shining lashes.

“There, boy, ’tis naught.  How could’st thou know?  But what of thine own
mother?”

“I know not.”

“Nay, what is this?  And thy father?”

“He was a gentle knight who died in battle ere I knew him.  I came a
little child to the Monastery, and know no other place.”

“Ah,”—vindictively,—“then _thy_ mother may have been a light o’ love.”

“Light of love; it has a wondrous fair sound,” said Hilarius with a
smile.

The maid looked at him speechless.

“_Go home_, _Boy_,” she said at last emphatically.

Just then a lad, a tumbler by his dress, pushed a way through the
undergrowth, and stood grinning at the pair.

“So, Gia!” he said.  “We must make haste; the others wait.”

“’Tis my brother,” said the dancer, “and”—pointing to the bag slung
across the youth’s shoulder—“I trust he hath a fine fat hen from thy
Monastery for our meal.”

Hilarius broke into a cold sweat.

The Convent’s hens!  The Saints preserve us!  Was nothing sacred, and
were the Ten Commandments written solely for use in the Monasteries?

“’Tis stealing,” he said feebly.

“’Tis stealing,” the dancer mocked.  “Hast thou another sermon ready, Sir
Preacher?”

“Empty bellies make light fingers,” quoth the youth.  “Did’st thou ever
hunger, master?”

“There is the fast of Lent which presses somewhat,” said Hilarius.

“But ever a meal certain once in the day?” queried the girl.

“Ay, surely, and collation also; and Sunday is no fast.”

The mischievous apes laughed—how they laughed!

“So, good Preacher,” said the dancer at last, rising to her feet, “thou
dost know it is wrong to steal; but hast never felt hunger.  Thou dost
know it is wrong to love any but God, the Saints, and thy mother; but
thou hast never known a mother, nor felt what it was to love.  Blind
eyes!  Blind eyes! the very forest could teach thee these things an thou
would’st learn.  Farewell, good novice, back to thy Saints and thy
nursery; for me the wide wide world; hunger and love—love—love!”

She seized her brother’s hand and together they danced away like two
bright butterflies among the trees.

Hilarius stared after them until they disappeared, and then with dazed
eyes and drooping head took his way back to the Monastery.  The train of
mules had just arrived; all was stir, bustle, and explanation; and in the
thick of it he slipped in unseen, unquestioned; but he was hardly
conscious of this mercy vouchsafed him, for in his heart reigned
desolation and doubt, and in his ears rang the dancer’s parting cry,
“Hunger and love—love—love!”



CHAPTER II
THE LOVE OF PRIOR STEPHEN


BROTHER BERNARD, the Precentor, dealt out gold, paint and vellum with
generous hand to his favourite pupil, and wondered at his downcast look.

“Methinks this gold is dull, Brother,” said Hilarius one day, fretfully,
to his old master.

And again—

“’Tis very poor vermilion.”

The Brother looked at him enquiry.

“Nay, nay, boy; ’tis thine eyes at fault; naught ails the colours.”

Later, the Precentor came to look at the delicate border Hilarius was
setting to the page of the Nativity of Our Lady.

“Now may God be good to us!” he cried with uplifted hands.  “Since when
did man paint the Blessed Mother with grey eyes and black hair—curly too,
i’ faith?”

Hilarius crimsoned, he was weary of limning ever with blue and gold, he
faltered.

It was the same in chapel.  The insistent question pursued him through
chant and psalm.  Did he really _love_ the Saints—St Benedict, St
Scholastica, St Bernard, St Hilary?  The names left him untouched; but
his lips quivered as he thought of the great love between the holy
brother and sister of his Order.  If he had had a sister would they have
loved like that?

The Saints’ Days came and went, and he scourged himself with the repeated
question, kneeling with burning cheeks, and eyes from which tears were
not absent, in the Chapel of the Great Mother.  “Light of Love,” the girl
had called his mother; what more beautiful name could he find for the
Queen of Saints herself?  So he prayed in his simplicity:—“Great Light of
Love, Mother of my mother, grant love, love, love, to thy poor sinful
son!”

The question came in his daily life.

Did he love the Prior?  He feared him; and his voice was for Hilarius as
the voice of God Himself.  Brother John?  He feared him too; Brother
John’s tongue was a thing to fear.  Brother Richard, old, half-blind?
Surely he loved Brother Richard?—sad, helpless, and lonely, by reason of
his infirmities—or was it only pity he felt for him?

Nay, let be; he loved them all.  The Monastery was his home, the Prior
his father, the monks his brethren; why heed the wild words of the witch
in the forest?  And yet what was it she had said?  “For me the wide
world, hunger, and love—love—love!”

He wandered in the Monastery garden and was troubled by its beauties.
Two sulphur butterflies sported around the tall white lilies at the
farmery door.  Did they love?

He watched the sparrows at their second nesting, full of business and
cheerful bickerings.  Did they love?

_She_ had said the answer was writ large for him to see: he wandered
staring, wide-eyed but sightless.

At last in his sore distress he turned to the Prior, as the ship-wrecked
mariner turns to the sea-girt rock that towers serene and unhurt above
the devouring waves.

The Prior heard him patiently, with here and there a shrewd question.
When the halting tale was told he mused awhile, his stern blue eyes grew
tender, and a little smile troubled the firm line of his mouth.

“My son,” he said at length, “thou art in the wrong school; nursery, was
it the maid said?  A shrewd lass and welcome to the hen.  Thou art a
limner at heart—Brother Bernard tells of thy wondrous skill with the
brush—and to be limner thou must learn to hunger and to love as the maid
said.  Ay, boy, and to be monk too, though alack, men gainsay it.”

“Father,” said Hilarius, waxing bold from excessive need, “did’st thou
ever love as the maid meant?”

“Ay, boy—thy mother.”

There was a long silence.  Then the boy said timidly:—

“The maid said she might be light of love; ’tis a beautiful thought.”

The Prior started, and looked at him curiously:—

“What didst thou tell the maid?”

“That I never knew her, but that my father was a gentle knight who died
ere I saw him; and then the maid said perchance my mother was light of
love.”

“Boy,” said the Prior gravely, “’tis a weary tale, and sad of telling.
Thy mother was wondrous fair without, but she reckoned love lightly, nay,
knew it not for the holy thing it is, but thought only of bodily lusts.
Pray for her soul”—his voice grew stern—“as for one of those upon whom
God, in His great pity, may have mercy.  Thus have I prayed these many
years.”

Hilarius looked at him in wide-eyed horror:—

“She was evil, wicked, my mother?”

“Ay—a light woman, that was what the maid meant.”

Then great darkness fell upon the soul of Hilarius, and he clasped the
Prior’s knees weeping and praying like a little child.

                                * * * * *

“And so, my son,” said the Prior, “for a time thou shalt go out into the
world, to strive and fail, hunger and love; only have a care that thou
art chaste in heart and life; for it is the pure shall see God, and
seeing love Him.  Leave me now that.  I may set in order thy going; and
send the Chamberlain hither to me.”

That night Hilarius knelt through the long hours at the great Rood, and
then at St Mary Maudlin’s altar he did penance for his dead mother’s sin.

A week later he left the Monastery as a bird leaves its nest, nay, is
pushed out by the far-seeing parent bird, full of vague terrors of the
great world without.  He had a purse for his immediate needs; a letter to
a great knight, Sir John Maltravers, who would be his patron; and another
to the Prior’s good friend, the Abbat of St Alban’s.  The Convent bade
him a sad farewell, for they loved this gentle lad who had been with them
from a little child; and Brother Richard strained his filmy eyes to look
his last at the young face he would never see again.

The Prior gave him the Communion; and later walked beside him to the
gates.  Then as Hilarius knelt he blessed him; and the boy, overmastered
by nameless fear, sprang up and prayed that he might stay and learn some
other way, however hard.  The Prior shook his head.

“Nay, my son, so it must be; else how shall I answer to the Master for
this most precious lamb of my flock?  Come back to us—an thou can’st—let
no fear deter thee; only take heed, when thine eyes are opened and the
great gifts of hunger and love are vouchsafed thee, to keep still the
faithful heart of a little child.”

Then he bade him go; and Hilarius, for the pull of his heart-strings,
must needs run hot-foot down the broad forest road and along the highway,
without daring to look back, and so out into the wide, wide world.



CHAPTER III
THE KING’S SONG-BIRD


MARTIN THE MINSTREL sat under a wayside oak singing softly to himself as
he tuned his vielle.  He was a long lanky fellow with straight black
locks flat against his sallow face, and dark eyes that smouldered in
hollow cavities.  He wore the King’s colours, and broke a manchet of
white bread with his mid-day repast.

“Heigh-ho!” sighed Martin, and laid the vielle lovingly beside him,
“another four leagues to Westminster, and I weary enough of shoe-leather
already, and not another penny piece in my pocket ’til I win back to good
King Ned.  A brave holiday I have had, from Candlemas to Midsummer; free
to sing or to be silent, to smile or frown; wide England instead of
palace walls; a crust of bread and a jug of cider instead of a king’s
banquet.  Now but another few leagues and the cage again.  Money in my
pocket, true; but a song here and a song there, such as suit the fancy of
the Court gentles, not of Martin the Minstrel.  Heigh-ho, heigh-ho! ’tis
a poor bird sings at the word of a king, and a poor enough song too, if
Edward did but know it.

“Who comes here?  Faith, the lad goes a steady pace and carries a light
heart from his song; and no ill voice either.”

It was Hilarius, and he sang the _Alma Redemptoris_ as he sped along the
green grass which bordered the highway.

When Martin hailed him he turned aside gladly, and his face lit up at the
sight of the vielle.

“Whence dost thou come, lad?” said Martin, eyeing him with interest.

“Many days’ journey from the Monastery of Prior Stephen,” answered
Hilarius.

“But thou art no monk!”

“Nay, a novice scarcely; but the Prior hath bidden me go forth to see the
world.  It is wondrous fair,” he added sincerely.

“He who speaks thus is cloister-bred,” said Martin, and as Hilarius made
sign of assent, “’tis writ on thy face as well.  Thy Prior gave thee
letters to the Abbat of St Peter’s, I doubt not; thy face is set for
Westminster.”

“Ay, for Westminster, but my letters are for that good knight, Sir John
Maltravers.  I should have made an end of my journeying ere now but that
two days ago I met strange company.  They took my purse and hat and
shoes, and kept me with them all night until the late dawn.  Then they
gave me my goods again, and bade me God-speed.’

“But kept thy purse?” Martin laughed.

“Nay, it is here, and naught is missing.  It was all passing strange, and
I feared them, for they looked evil men; yet they did me no wrong, and
set me on my way gently enough, giving me provision, which I lacked.”

“Pick-purses and cut-throats afraid of God’s judgments for once,”
muttered Martin; then aloud, “Well, young sir, we shall do well if we win
Westminster before night-fall; shall we journey together since our way is
the same?”

Hilarius assented gladly; and as they went, Martin told him of Court and
King, and the wondrous doings when the Princess Isabel was wed.  He
listened open-eyed to tales of joust and revel and sport; and heard
eagerly all the minstrel could tell of Sir John Maltravers himself, a man
of great and good reputation, and no mean musician; “and,” added Martin,
“three fair daughters he hath, the eldest Eleanor, fairest of them all,
of whom men say she would fain be a nun.  Thou art a pretty lad, I wager
one or other will claim thee for page.”

“I will strive to serve well,” said Hilarius soberly, “but I have never
spoken but to one maid ’til yesterday, when a woman gave me good-morrow.”

Martin looked at his companion queerly.

“And thou art for Westminster!  Nay, but by all the Saints this Prior of
thine is a strange master!”

“It is but for a time,” said Hilarius, “then I shall go back to the
Monastery again.  But first I would learn to be a real limner; I have
some small skill with the brush,” he added simply.

Martin stared.

“Back to the cloister?  Nay, lad, best turn about and get back now, not
wait till thou hast had a taste of Court life.  Joust and banquet and
revel, revel, banquet, and joust, much merry-making and little reason,
much love and few marryings: a gay round, but not such as makes a monk.”

Hilarius smiled.

“Nay, that life will not be for me.  I am to serve my lord, write for
him, methinks.  But tell me, good Martin, dost thou love the Court?  It
seems a fine thing to be the King’s Minstrel.”

“Nay, lad, nay,” said the other hastily, “give me the open country and
the greenwood, and leave to sing or be silent.  Still, the King is a good
master, and lets me roam as I list if I will but come back; ’tis
ill-faring in winter, so back I go to pipe in my cage and follow the
Court until next Lady-day lets the sun in on us again.”

He struck his vielle lightly, and the two fell into a slower pace as the
minstrel sang.  Hilarius’ eyes filled with tears, for he was still
heart-sore, and Martin’s voice rose and fell like the wind in the tossing
tree-tops which had beckoned him over the Monastery wall.  The song
itself was sad—of a lover torn from his mistress and borne away captive
to alien service.  When it was ended they took a brisker pace in silence;
then, after a while, Hilarius said timidly:—

“Did’st thou sing of thyself, good Martin?”

“Ay, lad, and of my mistress.”  He stopped suddenly, louted low to the
sky, and with comprehensive gesture took in the countryside.  “A fair
mistress, lad, and a faithful one, though of many moods.  A man suns
himself in the warmth of her caresses by day, and at night she is cold,
chaste, unattainable; at one time she is all smiles and tears, then with
boisterous gesture she bids one seek shelter from her buffets.  She gives
all and yet nothing; she trails the very traces of her hair across a
man’s face only to elude him.  She holds him fast, for she is mother of
all his children; yet he must seek as though he knew her not, or she
flouts him.”

Hilarius listened eagerly.  Was this what the dancer had meant—the “wide
wide world, hunger and love”?

“Did’st thou ever hunger, good Martin?”

“Ay, lad,” said the minstrel, surprised, “and ’tis good sauce for the
next meal”

“Did’st thou ever love?”

Martin broke into a great laugh.

“Ay, marry I have more times than I count years.  But see, here comes one
who knows little enough of hunger or love.”  Round the bend of the road
came a man in hermit’s dress carrying a staff and a well-filled wallet.
His carriage seemed suddenly to become less upright, and he leaned
heavily on his stick as he besought an alms from the two travellers.

Hilarius felt for his purse, but Martin stayed him.

“Nay, lad, better have left thy money with the pick-purses than help to
fill the skin of this lazy rogue; ’tis not the first time we have met.
See here,” and with a dexterous jerk he caught the hermit’s wallet.

This one was too quick for him; with uplifted staff and a mouthful of
oaths, sorely at variance with his habit, he snatched it back, flung the
bag across his shoulder, and made off at a round pace down the road,
while Martin roared after him to wait an alms laid on with a cudgel.

Hilarius gazed horrified from the retreating figure to his laughing
companion, who answered the unspoken question.

“A rascal, lad, yon carrion, and no holy father.  They are the pest of
every country-side, these lazy rogues, who never do a hand’s turn and yet
live better than many a squire.  I warrant he has good stuff in that
larder of his to make merry with.”

Hilarius walked on for some time in silence with bent head.

“I fear the world is an ill place and far from godliness,” he said at
last.

“It will look thus to one cloister-bred, and ’tis true enough that
godliness is far from most men; but if a hermit’s robe may cover a
rascal, often enough a good heart lies under an ill-favoured face and
tongue.  See, lad,” as another turn in the road brought them in sight of
Westminster, “there lies thy new world, God keep thee in it!”

He pointed to a grey-walled city rising from the water’s edge, with roof
and pinnacle, gable and turret, aflame in the light of the western sky;
in front flowed the river like a stream of molten gold.

Hilarius gave a little cry.

“’Tis like the New Jerusalem!” he said, and Martin smiled grimly.

An hour later they stood within the walls of Westminster city, and
Hilarius, amazed and weary, clung close to Martin’s side.  Around him he
saw russet-clad archers, grooms, men on horseback, pedlars, pages,
falconers, scullions with meats, gallant knights, gaily dressed ladies;
it was like a tangled dream.  The gabled fronts of the houses were richly
blazoned or hung with scarlet cloth; it was a shifting scene of colour,
life, and movement, and to Hilarius’ untutored eyes, wild confusion.
Outside the taverns clustered all sorts and conditions of men, drinking,
gossiping, singing, for the day’s work was done.  In the courtyard of the
“Black Boar” a chained bear padded restlessly to and fro, and Hilarius
crossed himself anxiously—was the devil about to beset him under all
guises at once?  He raised a fervent _Ora __pro me_ to St Benedict as he
hurried past.  A string of pack-horses in the narrow street sent folk
flying for refuge to the low dark doorways, and a buxom wench, seeing the
pretty lad, bussed him soundly.  This was too much, only the man in him
stayed the indignant tears.  “Martin, Martin!” he cried; but the minstrel
was on his own ground now, and was hailed everywhere with acclamations,
and news given and demanded in a breath.  Hilarius, shrinking, aghast,
his ears scourged with rough oaths and rude jests, his eyes offended by
the easy manners round him, his cheek hot from the late salute, took
refuge under a low archway, and waited with anxious heart until the
minstrel should have done with the crowd.

Martin did not forget him.

“Holà, lad!” he cried, “see how they welcome the King’s bird back to his
cage!  As for thee, thou hast gone straight to thy cot like a homing
pigeon; through that archway, lad, lies thy journey’s end.”  Then,
apprehending for the first time Hilarius’ white face and piteous eyes,
Martin strode across, swept him under the archway into a quiet courtyard
where a fountain rippled, and, having handed him over to Sir John’s
steward, left him with a friendly slap on the back and the promise of
speedy meeting.

Hilarius delivered the Prior’s letter, and followed the steward into a
rush-strewn hall where scullions and serving-men were busy with
preparations for the evening meal; and sat there, lonely and dejected,
his curiosity quenched, his heart sore, his whole being crying out for
the busied peace and silent orderliness of his cloister home.  The
servants gibed at him, but he was too weary to heed; indeed he hardly
noticed when the household swept in to supper, until a page-boy tweaked
him slyly by the ear and bade him come to table.  He ate and drank
thankfully, too dazed to take note of the meal; and the pages and squires
among whom he sat left him alone, abashed at his gentleness.  At last,
something restored by the much-needed food, Hilarius looked round the
hall.

It reminded him of the Refectory at home, save that it was far loftier
and heavily timbered.  The twilight stealing in through high lancet
windows served but to emphasize the upper gloom, which the morrow’s sun
would dissipate into cunningly carved woodwork—a man’s thought in every
quaintly wrought boss and panel, grotesque beast and guarding saint.  A
raised table stood at the upper end of the hall, and here gaily dressed
pages waited on the master of the house and his honoured guests.
Hilarius rightly guessed the tall, careworn man of distinguished presence
to be no other than Sir John himself, and he liked him well; but his eyes
wandered carelessly over the rest of the company until they were caught
and held by a woman’s face.  It was Eleanor, the fairest of the knight’s
three fair daughters; and when Hilarius saw her he felt as a weary
traveller feels who meets a fellow citizen in a far-off land.

“Even such a face must the Blessed Agnes have had,” he thought, his mind
reverting to his favourite Saint; “she is like the lilies in the garth at
home.”

It was a strange comparison, for the girl was extravagantly dressed in
costly materials and brilliant colours, her hair coifed in the foolish
French fashion of the day; and yet, despite it all, she looked a nun.
Her face was pale, her brows set straight; her eyes, save when she was
much moved, were like grey shadows veiling an unknown soul; her mouth,
delicately curved, was scarcely reddened; her head drooped slightly on
her long, slender neck, a gesture instinct with gracious humility.  She
was like a pictured saint: Hilarius’ gaze clung to her, followed her as
she left the hall, and saw her still as he sat apart while the serving
men cleared the lower tables and brought in the sleeping gear for the
night.  He lay down with the rest, and through the high, lancet windows
the moonlight kissed his white and weary face as it was wont to do on
bright nights in the cloister dormitory.  Around him men lay sleeping
soundly after the day’s toils; there was none to heed, and he sobbed like
a little homesick child, until his tired youth triumphed, and he fell
asleep, to dream of Martin and the Prior, the lady at the raised table,
and the pale, sweet lilies in the cloister garth.




_PART II_
THE FLOWER


CHAPTER I
THE CITY OF PURE GOLD


“BLIND eyes, blind eyes!” sang the dancer.

Hilarius woke with a start.  He had fallen asleep on a bench in the sunny
courtyard and his dream had carried him back to the forest.  He sat
rubbing his eyes and only half-awake, the sun kissing his hair into a
halo against the old grey wall.  A falcon near fretted restlessly on her
perch, and a hound asleep by the fountain rose, and, slowly stretching
its great limbs, came towards him.

It was four o’clock on a warm day in September; the courtyard was
deserted save for a few busied serving men, and the knight and his
household, were at a tilting in the Outer Bailey, all but the Lady
Eleanor, Hilarius’ mistress, for, as Martin had foreseen, Sir John had so
appointed it.

It was now two months since Hilarius had come to the city which had
seemed to him in the distance as the New Jerusalem full of promise; but
he had found no angels at the gates, nor were the streets full of the
righteous; nay, the place seemed nearer of kin to the Babylon of Blessed
John’s Vision—with a few holy ones who would surely be caught up ere
judgment fell, amongst them Sir John and Lady Eleanor.

A good knight and a God-fearing man was Sir John, tender to his children,
gentle with his people, a faithful servant to God and King Edward; shrewd
withal, and an apt reader of men.  Therefore, and because of the love he
bore to Prior Stephen, he set Hilarius to attend his eldest daughter, who
seemed to belong as little to this world as the lad himself; and felt
that in so doing he had achieved the best possible for his old friend,
according to his asking.

Hilarius for his part served the Lady Eleanor as an acolyte tends the
chapel of a saint, only she was further removed from him than a saint, by
reason of her pale humanity.  He soon perceived, as he watched her at
banquet, tourney, or pageant, that she went to a revel as to the
Sacrament, and sat at a mummers’ show with eyes fixed on the Unseen.  She
moved through the gay vivid world of Court gallants and joyous maidens
like a shadow, and the rout grew graver at her coming.

It was much the same with her lover, Guy de Steyning—brother of that Hugh
de Steyning men wot of as Brother Ambrosius—a gentle knight with mild
blue eyes, a peaked red beard, and great fervour for heavenly things.
The pair liked one another well; but their time was taken up with
preparation for Paradise rather than with earthly business, and their
speech lent itself more readily to devout phrases than to lovers’ vows.
It was small wonder, therefore, that another year saw them both by glad
consent in the cloister, he at Oxford, and Eleanor in the Benedictine
House of which her aunt was Prioress.

Hilarius had written of his saintly mistress to Prior Stephen just as he
had written of the wondrous beauty of St Peter’s Abbey: “With all its
straight, slender, upstanding pillars, methinks ’tis like the forest at
home” (forgetting that his more intimate knowledge of the forest partook
of the nature of sin).  “The Lady Eleanor, my honoured mistress,” he
wrote, “is a most saintly and devout maiden, full of heavenly lore, and
caring nought for the things of this world;” and he added, “’tis
beautiful to see such devotion where for the most part are sinful and
light-minded persons.”

The Prior laid the script aside with a smile and a sigh; and when Brother
Bernard asked news of the lad, answered a little sadly, “Nay, Brother, he
still sleeps;” and indeed there seemed no waking him to a world of
men—living, striving, sorely-tried men.

He dwelt in a land of his own making—a land of colour and light and
shadow in which much that he saw played a part; only the gorgeous
pageants turned to hosts of triumphant saints heralded by angels; while
the knights at a tourney in their brave armour pictured St George, St
Michael, or St Martin in his dreams.

It was a limner he longed to be, far away from the stir and stress, not a
page attending a great lady to the Court functions.  He yearned ever
after the Scriptorium, with its busied monks and stores of colour and
gold.  It lay but a stone’s throw away behind the jealous Monastery
walls, but it was no part of Prior Stephen’s plan that the lad should go
straight from one cloister to another.

To Hilarius sitting on the bench in the sun, came one of Eleanor’s
tirewomen to bid him wait on her mistress.  He rose at once and followed
her through the hall and up the winding stair, along a gallery hung with
wondrous story-telling tapestry, to the bower where Eleanor sat with two
of her women busied with their needle.

Hilarius found his mistress, her hands idle on her knee.  He louted low,
and she bade him bring a stool and sit beside her.

“I am weary,” she said; “this life is weariness.  Tell me of the
Monastery and the forest—stay, tell me rather of the New Jerusalem that
Brother Ambrose saw and limned.”

Hilarius, nothing loth, settled himself at her feet, elbow on knee, and
chin on his open hands, his dreamy blue eyes gazing away out of the
window at the cloud-flecked sky above the Abbey pinnacles.

“The Brother Ambrose,” he began, “was ever a saintly man, approved of God
and beloved by the Brethren; ay, and a crafty limner, save that of late
his eyesight failed him.  To him one night, as he lay a-bed in the
dormitory, came the word of the Lord, saying: “Come, and I will show thee
the Bride, the Lamb’s wife.”  And Brother Ambrose arose and was carried
to a great and high mountain, even as in the Vision of Blessed John.
’Twas a still night of many stars, and Brother Ambrose, looking up, saw a
radiant path in the heavens; and lo! the stars gathered themselves
together on either side until they stood as walls of light, and the four
winds lapped him about as in a mantle and bore him towards the wondrous
gleaming roadway.  Then between the stars came the Holy City with roof
and pinnacle aflame, and walls aglow with such colours as no earthly
limner dreams of, and much gold.  Brother Ambrose beheld the Gates of
Pearl, and by every gate an angel, with wings of snow and fire, and a
face no man dare look on, because of its exceeding radiance.

“Then as Brother Ambrose stretched out his arms because of his great
longing, a little grey cloud came out of the north and hung between the
walls of light, so that he no longer beheld the Vision, but heard only a
sound as of a great multitude crying, ‘Alleluia’; and suddenly the winds
came about him again, and lo! he found himself in bed in the dormitory,
and it was midnight, for the bell was ringing to Matins; and he rose and
went down with the rest; but when the Brethren left the choir, Brother
Ambrose stayed fast in his place, hearing and seeing nothing because of
the Vision of God; and at Lauds they found him and told the Prior.

“He questioned Brother Ambrose of the matter, and when he heard the
Vision, bade him limn the Holy City even as he had seen it; and the
Precentor gave him uterine vellum and much fine gold and what colours he
asked for the work.  Then Brother Ambrose limned a wondrous fair city of
gold with turrets and spires; and he inlaid blue for the sapphire, and
green for the emerald, and vermilion where the city seemed aflame with
the glory of God; but the angels he could not limn, nor could he set the
rest of the colours as he saw them, nor the wall of stars on either hand;
and Brother Ambrose fell sick because of the exceeding great longing he
had to limn the Holy City, and was very sad; but our Prior bade him thank
God and remember the infirmity of the flesh, which, like the little grey
cloud, veiled Jerusalem to his sight.”

There was silence.  Lady Eleanor clasped her shadowy blue-veined hands
under her chin, and in her eyes too was a great longing.

“It seemeth to me small wonder that Brother Ambrose fell sick,” she said,
at length.

Hilarius nodded:

“He had ever a patient, wistful look as of one from home; and often he
would sit musing in the cloister and scarce give heed to the Office
bell.”

“Methinks, Hilarius, it will be passing sweet to dwell in that Holy
City.”

“Nay, lady,” said her page tenderly, “surely thou hast had a vision even
as Brother Ambrose, for thine eyes wait always, like unto his.”

Eleanor shook her head, and two tears crept slowly from the shadow of her
eyes.

“Nay, not to such as I am is the vision vouchsafed; though my desire is
great, ’tis ever clogged by sin; and for this same reason I would get me
to a cloister where I might fast and pray unhindered.”

Hilarius looked at her with great compassion.

“Sweet lady, the Lord fulfil all thy desires; yet, methinks, thou art
already as one of His saints.”

“Nay, but a poor sinner in an evil world,” she answered.  “Sing to me,
Hilarius.”

And he sang her the _Salve Regina_, and when it was ended she bade him
go, for she would fain spend some time in prayer upon her primer.

“Our Lady and all Saints be with thee, sweet mistress!” he said, and left
her to sob out once more the sins and sorrows of her tender childlike
heart.



CHAPTER II
THE CITY THAT HILARIUS SAW


HILARIUS went back to the courtyard, his soul full of trouble.  He leant
against the fountain, playing with the cool water which fell with
monotonous rhythm into the shallow timeworn basin.  The cloudless sky
smiled back at him from the broken mirror into which he gazed, and the
glory of its untroubled blue thrilled him strangely.  He too had a vision
which he longed to limn; but it was of earth, not Heaven, like that
vouchsafed to Brother Ambrose; and yet none the less precious, for was it
not the Monastery at home which so haunted him, the grey, familiar walls
with their girdle of sunlit pasture, and the mantling forest which bowed
and swayed at the will of the whispering wind?

“As well seek Heaven’s gate in yon fair reflection as learn to love in
this light-minded, deceitful city,” Hilarius said to himself a little
bitterly.  He deemed that he had plumbed its hollowness and learnt the
full measure of its vanity.  Already he shunned the company and
diversions of his fellow pages, though he was ever ready to serve them.
A prentice lad’s homely brawl set him shivering; a woman’s jest painted
his cheeks ’til they rivalled a young maid’s at her first wooing.  He
plucked aside his skirts and walked in judgment; only wherever mountebank
or juggler held the crowd enthralled, there Hilarius, half-ashamed, would
push his way, in the unacknowledged hope of seeing again the maid whose
mother, like his own, was light o’ love: a strange link truly to bind
Hilarius in his blindness to the rest of poor sinful humanity.

Suddenly there broke on his musing the clatter of horse-hoofs, and a gay
young page came spurring with bent head under the low archway.  He reined
up by Hilarius:

“Dear lad, kind lad, wilt thou do me a service?”

“That will I, Hal, an it be in my power.”

“Take this purse, then, to the Cock Tavern and give it mine host.  ’Tis
Luke Langland’s reckoning; he left it with me yesternight, but my head
was full of feast and tourney, and ’tis yet undelivered.  Mine host will
not let the serving men and the two horses go ’til he hath seen Luke’s
money, and I cannot stay, for my lord will need me.”

Hilarius took the purse; and his fellow page, blessing him for a good
comrade, clattered back through the gateway.

The streets were full of life and colour; serving men in the livery of
Abbat and Knight, King and Cardinal, lounged at the tavern doors dicing,
gaming, and drinking.  Hilarius walked delicately and strove to shut eyes
and ears to the sights and sounds of sin.  He delivered the purse, only
to hear mine host curse roundly because it was lighter than the
reckoning; and after being hustled and jeered at for a milk-faced varlet
by the men who stood drinking, he sought with scarlet cheeks for a less
frequented way.

The quiet of a narrow street invited him; he turned aside, and suddenly
traffic and turmoil died away.  He was in a city within a city; a place
of mean tenements, wretched hovels, ruined houses, and, keeping guard
over them all, a grim square tower, blind save for two windowed eyes.
Men, ill-favoured, hang-dog, or care-worn, stood about the house doors
silent and moody; a white-faced woman crossing the street with a bucket
gave no greeting; the very children rolling in the foul gutters neither
laughed nor chattered nor played.  The city without seemed very far from
this dismal sordid place.

Hilarius felt a touch on his shoulder, and a kindly voice said:—

“How now, young sir, for what crime dost thou take sanctuary?”

He looked up and saw an old man in the black dress of an ecclesiastic,
the keys of St Peter broidered on his arm.

“Sanctuary,” stammered Hilarius, “nay, good sir, I—”

The other laughed.

“Wert thou star-gazing, then, that thou could’st stray into these
precincts and know it not?  This is the City of Refuge to which a man may
flee when he has robbed or murdered his fellow, or been guilty of
treason, seditious talk, or slander—a strange place in which to see such
a face as thine.”

“I did but seek a quiet way home and lost the turning,” said Hilarius;
“in sooth, ’tis a fearful place.”

“Ay, boy, ’tis a place of darkness and despair, despite its safety—even
the King’s arm falls short when a man is in these precincts: but from
himself and the knowledge of his crime, a man cannot flee; hence I say
’tis a place of darkness and despair.”

The unspoken question shone in Hilarius’ eyes, and the other answered it.

“Nay, there is no blood on my soul, young sir.  ’Twas good advice I gave,
well meant but ill received, so here I dwell to learn the wisdom of fools
and the foolishness of wisdom.”

“Does the Abbat know what evil men these are that seek the shelter of
Holy Church?” asked Hilarius, perplexed.

“Most surely he knows; but what would’st thou have?  It hath ever been
the part of the Church to embrace sinners with open arms lest they
repent.  A man leaves wrath behind him when he flees hither; but should
he set foot in the city without, he is the law’s, and no man may gainsay
it.”

“Nay, sir, but these look far from repentance,” said Hilarius.

“Ay, ay, true eno’,” rejoined the other cheerfully, “but then ’tis not
for nothing Mother Church holds the keys.  Man’s law may fail to reach,
but there is ever hell-fire for the unrepented sinner.”

Hilarius nodded, and his eyes wandered over the squalid place with the
North Porch of the Abbey for its sole beauty.

“It must be as hell here, to live with robbers and men with bloody
hands.”

“Nay,” said the old man hastily, “many of them are kindly folk, and many
have slain in anger without thought.  ’Tis a sad place, though, and thy
young face is like a sunbeam on a winter’s day.  Come, I will show thee
thy road.”

He led Hilarius through the winding alleys and set him once more on the
edge of the city’s stir and hum.

“I can no further,” he said.  “Farewell, young sir, and God keep thee!
An old man’s blessing ne’er harmed any one.”

Hilarius gave him godden, and sped swiftly back through the streets
crowded with folks returning from the tourney.  The Abbey bell rang out
above the shouts and din.

“’Tis an evil, evil world,” quoth young Hilarius.



CHAPTER III
A SENDING FROM THE LORD


OCTOBER and November came and sped, and Hilarius’ longing to be a limner
waxed with the waning year.  One day by the waterside he met Martin, of
whom he saw now much, now little, for the Minstrel followed the Court.

“The cage grows too small for me, lad,” he said, as he stood with
Hilarius watching the sun sink below the Surrey uplands; “ay, and I love
one woman, which is ill for a man of my trade.  I must be away to my
mistress, winter or no winter, else my song will die and my heart break.”

“’Tis even so with me, good Martin,” said Hilarius sadly; “I too would
fain go forth and serve my mistress; but the cage door is barred, and I
may not open it from within.”

Martin whistled and smote the lad friendly on the shoulder.

“Patience, lad, patience, thou art young yet.  Eighteen this Martinmas,
say you?  In truth ’tis a great age, but still leaves time and to spare.
‘_All things come to a waiting man_,’ saith the proverb.”

A week later he chanced on Hilarius sitting on a bench under the south
wall of the farmery cloister.  It was a mild, melancholy day, and suited
the Minstrel’s mood.

He sat down by him and told of King and Court; then when Hilarius had
once more cried his longing, he said gravely:—

“One comes who will open more cage doors than thine and mine, lad—and yet
earn no welcome.”

Hilarius looked at him questioningly.

“Lad, hast thou ever seen Death?”

“Nay, good Martin.”

“It comes, lad, it comes; or I am greatly at fault.  I saw the Plague
once in Flanders, and fled against the wind, and so came out with a clean
skin; now I am like to see it again; for it has landed in the south, and
creeps this way.  Mark my words, lad, thou wilt know Death ere the winter
is out, and such as God keep thee from.”

Hilarius understood little of these words but the sound of them, and
turned to speak of other things.

Martin looked at him gloomily.

“Best get back to the cloister and Prior Stephen, lad.”

“Nay, good Martin, that may not be; but I have still a letter for the
Abbat of St Alban’s, and would hasten thither if Sir John would set me
free.  Methinks I am a slow scholar,” went on poor Hilarius ruefully,
“for I have not yet gone hungry—and as for love, methinks there are few
folk to love in this wicked city.”

Martin laughed and then grew grave again.

“Maybe he comes who will teach thee both, and yet I would fain find thee
a kinder master.  Well, well, lad, get thee to St Alban’s an it be
possible; thou art best in a cloister, methinks, for all thy wise Prior
Stephen may say.”

And he went off singing—

    “Three felons hung from a roadside tree,
    One black and one white and one grey;
    And the ravens plucked their eyes away
    From one and two and three,
    That honest men might see
    And thievish knaves should pay;
          Lest these might be
          As blind as they.
          Ah, well-a-day, well-a-day!
          One—two—three!  On the gallows-tree hung they.”

Hilarius listened with a smile until the last notes of Martin’s voice had
died away, and then fell a-musing of hunger and love, the dancer and the
Prior.

Suddenly, as if his thought had taken speech, he heard a voice say:

“I hunger, I hunger, feed me most sweet Manna, for I hunger—I hunger, and
I love.”

He sprang to his feet, but there was no one in sight.  Again the shrill
quavering voice called:

“Love of God, I hunger, Love of God, I die.  Blessed Peter, pray for me!
Blessed Michael, defend me!”

Hilarius knew now; it was the Ankret, that holy man who for sixty years
had fasted and prayed in his living tomb at the corner of the cloister.
He was held a saint above all the ankrets before him, and wondrous wise;
the King himself had sought his counsel, and the Convent held him in high
esteem.

Again the voice: Hilarius strove to reach up to the grated window of the
cell—it was too high above him.  An overpowering desire came upon him to
ask the Ankret of his future.  With a spring he caught at the window’s
upright bars; his cap flew off and he hung bare-headed, the sun behind
him, gazing into the cell.

On his knees was an old man whose long white hair lay in matted locks
upon his shoulders, and whose beard fell far below his girdle.  The skin
of his face was like grey parchment, and his deep-set eyes glowed
strangely in their hollow cavities.

Hilarius strove to speak, but words failed him.

The Ankret looking up saw the beautiful face at his window with its
aureole of yellow hair, and stretched out his bony withered hands.

“Blessed Michael, Blessed Michael, the messenger of the Lord!” he cried,
gaining strength from the vision.

“What would’st thou, Father!” said Hilarius, afraid.

“Nay, who am I that I should speak? and yet, and yet—” the old man’s
voice grew weaker—“the Bread of Heaven, that I may die in peace.”

He stretched out his hands again entreatingly, and Hilarius was sore
perplexed.

“Dost thou crave speech of the Abbat, my Father?”

The Ankret looked troubled.

“Blessed Michael, Blessed Michael!” he murmured entreatingly.

Hilarius’ hands hurt him sore; it was clear that the holy man saw some
wondrous vision, and ’twas no gain time to speech of him.

“Blessed Michael, Blessed Michael!” quavered the old, tired voice.

Hilarius felt himself slipping; with a great effort he held fast and
braced himself against the wall.

“Blessed Michael, Blessed Michael!”—The appeal in the half-dead face was
awful.

Hilarius’ grip failed; he slid to the ground bruised and sore from the
unaccustomed strain, but well pleased.  True, he had gained no counsel
from the Ankret, but he had seen the holy man—ay, even when he was
visited by a heavenly messenger, and that in itself should bring a
blessing.  He turned to go, when a sudden thought came to him.  There was
no one in sight, no sound but the failing cry from the tired old saint.
Hilarius doffed his cap again and his fresh young voice rose clear and
sweet through the thin still air:—

    “_Iesu_, _dulcis memoria_,
    _Dans vera cordis gaudia_;
    _Sed super mel et omnia_
    _Dulcis ejus praesentia_.”

At the fourth stanza his memory failed him; but he could hear the Ankret
crooning to himself the words he had sung, and crying softly like a
little child.

Hilarius went home with wonder in his heart, but said no word of what had
befallen him; and that night the Ankret died, and the Sub-Prior gave him
the last sacraments.

Next day it was known that a vision had been vouchsafed the holy man
before his end; and that the Prince of Angels himself had brought his
message of release: and Hilarius, greatly content to think that the
Blessed Michael had indeed been so near him, kept his own counsel.

He told Lady Eleanor of Martin’s words.

“God save the King!” she said, and went into her oratory to pray: and
there was need of prayer, for the Minstrel’s foreboding was no idle one.
Ere London knew it the Plague was at her gates; yet the King, undeterred,
came to spend Christmas at Westminster; but Martin was not in his train.
Men’s mirth waxed hot by reason of the terror they would not recognise.
Banquet and revel, allegory and miracle play; pageant of beautiful women
and brave men; junketing, ay, and rioting—thus they flung a defiance at
the enemy; and then fled: for across the clash of the feast bells sounded
the mournful note of funeral dirge and requiem.

Eleanor, knowing Hilarius’ ardent longing for school and master, prayed
her father to set him on the way to St Alban’s instead of keeping him
with them to follow a fugitive Court.  The good knight, feeling one page
more or less mattered little when Death was so ready to serve, and
anxious for the lad’s safety and well-being, assented gladly enough.  So
it came to pass that on the Feast of the Three Kings Hilarius found
himself on the Watling Street Way, a well-filled purse in his pocket, but
a fearful heart under his jerkin; for the Death he had never seen loomed
large, a great king, and by all accounts a most mighty hunter.



CHAPTER IV
BLIND EYES WHICH COULD SEE


It is, for the most part, the moneyed man who flees from the face of
Death; the poor man awaits him quietly, with patient indifference, in the
field or under his own roof-tree; ay, and often flings the door wide for
the guest, or hastens his coming.  Thus it came to pass that while the
stricken poor agonised in the grip of unknown horror, bishop and
merchant, prince and chapman, fine ladies in gorgeous litters, abbesses
with their train of nuns, and many more, fled north, east, and west, from
the pestilent cities, and encumbered the roads with much traffic.  One
procession, and one only, did Hilarius meet making its way to London.

It was a keen frosty day; there had been little previous rain or snow,
and the roads were dry; the trees in the hedgerows, bare and stricken
skeletons, stood out sharp and black against a cold grey sky.  Suddenly
the sound of a mournful chant smote upon the still air, music and words
alike strange.  The singers came slowly up the roadway, men of foreign
aspect walking with bent heads, their dark, matted locks almost hiding
their wild, fixed eyes and thin, haggard faces.  They were stripped to
the waist, their backs torn and bleeding, and carried each a bloody
scourge wherewith to strike his fellow.  At the third step they signed
the sign of the Cross with their prostrate bodies on the ground; and thus
in blood and penitence they went towards London.

Hilarius was familiar with the exercise but not the manner of it.  These
strange, wild men filled him with horror, and he shrank back with the
rest.  Then a man sprang from among the watching crowd, tore off jerkin
and shirt, and flung up his arms to heaven with a great sob.

“I left wife and children to perish alone,” he cried, “and fled to save
my miserable skin.  Now may God have mercy on my soul, for I go back.
Smite, and smite hard, brother!” and he stepped in front of the first
flagellant.

At this there arose a cry from the folk that looked on, and many fell on
their knees and confessed their sins, accusing themselves with groanings
and tears; but Hilarius, seized with sudden terror, turned and fled
blindly, without thought of direction, his eyes wide, the blood drumming
in his ears, a great horror at his heels—a horror that could drive a man
from wife and child, that had driven brave Martin to flee against the
wind, and all this folk to leave house and home to save that which most
men count dearer than either.

At last, exhausted and panting, he stayed to rest, and saw, coming
towards him, a blind friar.  Hilarius had turned into a by-way in the
hurry of his terror, and they two were alone.  The friar was a small,
mean-looking man, feeling his way by the aid of hand and staff; his face
upturned, craving the light.  He stopped when he came up with Hilarius,
and turned his sightless eyes on him; a fire burnt in the dead ashes.

“Art thou that son of Christ waiting to guide my steps, as the Lord
promised me?”

Hilarius started back, afraid at the strange address; but the friar laid
one lean hand on his arm, and, letting the staff slip back against his
shoulder, felt Hilarius’ face, not with the light and practised touch of
the blind, but slowly and carefully, frowning the while.

“Son, thou wilt come with me?”

“Nay, good Father, I may not; I am for St Alban’s.”

“Whence, my son?”

“From Westminster, good Father.”

“Nay, then, thou mayest spare shoe-leather.  I left the Monastery but
now, and, I warrant thee, they promise small welcome to those from the
pestilent cities.  What would’st thou with the Abbat?”

Hilarius told him.

The friar flung up his hands.

“_Laus Deo_!  _Laus Deo_!” he cried, “now I know thou art in very truth
the lad of my dream.  Listen, my son, and I will tell thee all.  Thrice
has the vision come to me; I see the mother who bore me carried away,
struggling and cursing, by men in black apparel, and Hell is near at
hand, belching out smoke and flame, and many hideous devils; yet the
place is little Bungay, where my mother hath a cot by the river.  When
first the dream came I lay at Mechlin in the Monastery there; my flesh
quaked and my hair stood up by reason of the awfulness of the vision;
then as I mused and prayed I saw in it the call of the Lord, that I might
wrestle with Satan for my mother’s soul, for she was ever inclined to
evil arts and spells, and thought little of aught save gain.

“Forthwith I suffered no man to stay me, and set off, the Plague at my
heels; but ever out-stripping it, I was careful to preach its coming in
every place, that men might turn and repent.  Then as I tarried on the
seaboard for a ship the Plague came; and because I had preached its
coming, the people rose in wrath, and, falling upon me, roughly handled
me.  They beat me full sore in the market-place; then, piercing my
eyeballs, set me adrift in a small boat.

“Two days and two nights I lay at the mercy of the sea, darkness and
light alike to me, and with no thought of time; for the flames of hell
burnt in my eyes, and a worse anguish in my heart because of my mother’s
soul.”

“And then, and then?” tried Hilarius breathlessly, tears of pure pity in
his eyes.

“Then the Lord cared for me even as He cared for the Prophet Jonas, and
sent a ship that His message might not be hindered.  The shipmen were
kindly folk, but we were driven out of our course by a great wind, and at
last came ashore in Lincolnshire.  I have come south thus far by the aid
of Christian men, but time presses; and now, lo! thou art here to guide
me.”

“But, my Father,” said poor Hilarius, seeing yet another barrier in the
way of his desires, “’tis a limner I would be; and I am from Westminster,
not London, and then there is Prior Stephen’s letter—”

The friar held up his hand:

“Thou shalt be a limner, my son, the Lord hath revealed it to me.  Last
night the vision came again, and a voice cried: ‘Speed, for a son of
Christ waits by the way to guide thy steps,’ and lo! thou art here,
waiting by the way, as the voice said.  And now, son, an thou wilt come
thou shalt take thy letter to Wymondham—’tis a cell of this Abbey—for
there is Brother Andreas from overseas who hath wondrous skill with the
brush; he will teach thee, for thou shalt say to him that Brother Amadeus
sent thee, who is now as Bartimeus, waiting for the light of the Lord;
but first thou shalt set me in that village of Bungay, where my mother
dwelleth.”

Hilarius listened, gazing awestruck at the withered eyes that vainly
questioned his face.  He had forgotten plague, death, flagellants, in
this absorbing tale of the man of God, who was even as one of the blessed
martyrs.  Brother Andreas!  A skilled limner!  How should he, Hilarius,
gainsay one with a vision from the Lord?

“I obey, my Father,” he cried joyously, taking the friar’s hand; and they
two passed swiftly down the road, their faces to the east.



CHAPTER V
THE WHITE WAY AND WHERE IT LED


IT was a bitterly cold night and St Agnes’ Eve; the snow fell heavily,
caught into whirling eddies by the keen north wind.  Hilarius and the
Friar, crossing an empty waste of bleak unprotected heath, met the full
force of the blast, and each moment the snow grew denser, the darkness
more complete.  They struggled on, breathless, beaten, exhausted and
lost; Hilarius, leading the Friar by one hand, held the other across his
bent head to shield himself from the buffets of the wind.

Suddenly he stood fast.

“I can no more, Father,” he said, “the snow is as a wall; there is naught
to see or to hear; I deem we are far from our right way.”  His voice was
very weak, and he caught at the Friar for support.

“I will pray the Lord, my son, that He open thine eyes, even as He opened
the eyes of the prophet’s servant in the besieged city; so shalt thou see
a host of angels encompassing us, for we are about the Lord’s business.”

“Nay, my Father,” said Hilarius feebly, “I see no angels, and I perish.”
He tottered, and would have fallen, but the Friar caught him in his arms.
A moment he stood irresolute, the boy on his breast, then flung away his
staff and lifted him to his shoulder.

With unerring, confident step he went forward through the snow, a white
figure bearing a white burden in a white world.  All at once the wind
dropped, the blinding shower ceased, and Hilarius, rested and comforted,
spoke:—

“Is it thou, my Father?”

“It is I, my son, but angels are on either hand and go before to guide.
The snow hath ceased, canst thou walk?”

He set Hilarius gently on his feet, and lo! he found the stars alight!

The boy gave a cry, and forgetting his companion’s darkness, pointed to
the left where lay a snow-clad village.

“A miracle, a miracle, my Father!”

“A miracle, i’ faith, my son: the Lord hath given guidance to the blind
as He promised.  Let us go down.”

They went by the white way under the stars; and Hilarius was full of awe
and comfort because of the angels of God which attended on a poor friar.

At the village hostel they found rough but friendly entertainment and
several guests.  They dried themselves at a roaring fire, and Hilarius
made a hearty meal; the Friar would eat nothing save a morsel of bread.

A messenger was there, a short stout man with stubbly beard, bright black
eyes like beads, and a high colour.  He was riding with despatches from
the King to the Abbat at Bury, and had fearful tales to tell of the
Plague; how in London they piled the dead in trenches, while many who
escaped the pest died of want and cold; it was a city of the dead rather
than the living.  One great lord, travelling post-haste from Westminster,
had been found by his servants to have the disorder, and they fled,
leaving him by the wayside to perish.

Hilarius heard horror-struck.

“’Tis a grievous shame so to desert a sick master,” he said.

“Nay, lad,” said a chapman in the corner, “but a man loves his own skin
best.”

“Ay, ay,” said a fat ruddy-faced miller, overtaken by the storm on his
way to a neighbouring village, “a man’s own skin before all.  Fill your
belly first and your neighbour’s afterwards.  Live and let live.”

“Ay, let live,” chimed in mine host, bustling in with a stoop of cider
for the chapman, “but, by the Rood, ’tis cruel work when two lone women
are murdered for a bit of mouldy bacon and a lump of bread; for I’se
warrant ’tis a long day sin’ they had more than that at best.”

The chapman took his cider.

“Where was this work done?” he said.

“Nay, where but here on the bruary!  The women were found Wednesday
se’n-night by the herd as he went folding.  They lay on the floor in
their blood.”

Hilarius turned sick.  In Westminster, by some miracle, he had been
spared the sight of violent death—ay, or of death in any form—and had
seen nothing worse than a rogue in the stocks, for which sight he had
thanked Heaven piously.

“’Tis the fault of the rich,” said a voice, and Hilarius saw, to his
surprise, that there was a second friar in the room; a tall,
bullet-headed man, with a heavy, obstinate jaw ornamented with a scanty
fringe of black hair.

“The rich grow fat, and the poor starve,” he went on, “’tis hunger makes
a man kill his brother for a mouthful of mouldy bacon.”

“Nay,” said the miller, “there was no need to kill, Father.  A man could
have taken the meat from two lone women and left them their lives.”

“Why take from folk as poor as themselves?” said mine host.  “Let them
rob the rich an they must rob.”

“Ay,” said the friar, “rob the rich, say you, take their own, say I.  God
did not make this world that one man should be over full and another go
empty; nor is it religion that the monks’ should live on the fat o’ the
land and grind the faces of the poor.  How many manors, think you, has
the Abbat of St Edmund’s, and how many on his land lack bread?”

Hilarius listened, scarlet with indignation, a flood of wrathful defence
pent at his lips, for the blind friar laid a restraining hand on his
sleeve.

Mine host scratched his head doubtfully.  The teaching was seditious, and
made a man liable to stocks and pillory; but it tickled the ears of the
common folk and ’twas ill to quarrel with the Mendicants.  Help came to
him in his perplexity: a loud knocking on the barred door made the guests
within start.

“’Tis eight o’ the clock,” said the miller, affrighted, for he had a
heavy purse on him.

“Let them knock and cool their hot heads,” said the seditious friar
composedly.

The rest nodded approval.

Then a man’s voice threatened without.

“What ho! unbar the door.  Is this a night to keep a man without?  Open,
open, or, by the Mass, thou shalt smart for it.”

Mine host shook his head fearfully, and his fat cheeks trembled; he moved
slowly and unwillingly to the door and took down the stout wooden bar.
As it swung back the door flew open, and a man burst in, at sight of whom
mine host turned yet paler.

“Food and drink,” said the new-comer sharply, flinging himself on a bench
by the fire.

Hilarius thought he had never seen so strange a fellow.  His hair was
close cropped; ay, and his ears also.  His eyes were very small and near
together; his nose a shapeless lump; his lip drawn up showed two rat-like
teeth.  Silence fell on the company, and the chapman who had been
searching amongst his goods for something wherewith to pay his
hospitality, was hastily putting them back, when the man, looking up,
caught sight of a bundle of oaten pipes among the miscellaneous wares.
He plucked one to him, and in a moment the air was full of tender liquid
notes—a thrush’s roundelay.  Then a blackbird called and his mate
answered; a cuckoo cried the spring-song; a linnet mourned with lifting
cadence; a nightingale poured forth her deathless love.

Mine host came in with a dish piled high and a stoop of mead; the man
threw the pipe from him with a rough oath and fell to ravenously on the
victuals.  He held his head low and ate brutishly amid dead silence; then
he looked up and cursed at them for their sorry mood.

“What!  Hugh pipes and never a word of thanks nor a jest?  Damn you all
for dull dogs!”

The blind friar rose and fixed his withered eyes on the man’s dreadful
face.

“Piping Hugh of Mildenhall,” he said, and at his voice the man leapt to
his feet and thrust his arm out as if for protection.  “Piping Hugh of
Mildenhall,” said the Friar again, “I have a message for thee from the
Lord God.  I cried thee damned in my own name once, when thou did’st take
my little sister to shame and death; now I cry thee thrice damned in the
name of the Lord, for the cup of thine iniquity is full and thy hands red
with blood.  Man hath branded thee; now God will set His mark on thee and
all men shall see it.  The Plague will come and come swiftly, but it
shall not touch thee; many shall die in their sins; thou shalt live on
with thine.  A brute thou art, and with brutes thou shalt herd; thou
shalt howl as a ravening wolf, and as such men shall hunt thee from their
doors.  Thou shalt seek death, even as Cain sought and found it not,
because of the mark of the Lord.  Thou art damned, thrice damned; thy
speech shall go from thee, thy sight fail thee, thy mind be darkened;
thou art given over to the Evil One, and he shall torment thee with
remembrance.”

There was dead silence; then with a long shrill howl the man tore open
the door, dashed from the house, and fled, a black blotch upon the
whiteness of the night.

The guests huddled together aghast, and no man moved, until Hilarius,
full of pride at his Friar’s powers, stepped forward to close the door.
He was too late; it swung to with a loud crash like the sound of doom.
The Friar sank back composedly on the bench, and the company began in
silence to make preparation for the night.  When all was ordered,
Hilarius bade the Friar come, and he rose at the lad’s voice and touch.
Then he crossed to where the others stood apart eyeing him fearfully.

He laid his hand on the miller’s breast and said in a clear, low voice:
“Thou wilt die, brother.”

He laid his hand on the messenger’s breast: “Thou wilt die, brother.”

He laid his hand on the chapman’s breast: “Thou wilt die, brother.”

He laid his hand on mine host’s breast: “Thou wilt die, brother.”

Then he came to the other Friar who stood at a little distance, his face
dark with anger and fear, and laid his hand on his breast: “Thou wilt
live, my brother—and repent.”



CHAPTER VI
A DARK FINDING


IT is a far cry from St Alban’s to Bungay—which village of the good ford
lies somewhat south-east of Norwich, five leagues distant—and the journey
is doubled in the winter time.  Hilarius and the Friar were long on the
road, for January’s turbulent mood had imprisoned them many days, and
early February had proved little kinder.  They had companied with folk,
light women and brutal men; but, for the most part, coarse word and foul
jest were hushed in the presence of the blind friar and the lad with the
wondering eyes.  In every village the Friar preached and called on men to
repent and be saved, for Death’s shadow was already upon them.  Folk
wondered and gaped—the Plague was still only a name ten leagues east of
London—but many repented and confessed and made restitution, though some
heard with idle ears, remembering the prophecy of Brother Robert who had
come with the same message half a man’s lifetime before, and that no evil
had followed his preaching.

At last St Matthias’ Eve saw Hilarius and the Friar at St Edmund’s Abbey.
There were many guests for the Convent’s hospitality that night, and as
Hilarius entered the hall of the guest-house—a brother had charged
himself with the care of the Friar—he heard the sound of the vielle, and
a rich voice which sang in good round English against the fashion of the
day.

“Martin, Martin!” he cried.

The vielle was instantly silent.

“Holà, lad!” cried the Minstrel, springing to his feet; he caught
Hilarius to him and embraced him heartily.

“Why, lad, not back in thy monastery?  Nay, but I made sure the Plague
would send thee flying home, and instead I find thee strayed farther
afield.”  Then seeing the injured faces round him for that the song was
not ended, he drew Hilarius to the bench beside him and took up his
vielle.  “Be still now, lad, ’til I have finished my ditty for this
worshipful company; then, an’t please thee to tell it, I will hear thy
tale.”

The guests, who had looked somewhat sour at the interruption, unpursed
their lips, and settled to listen as the minstrel took up his song:—

    “The fair maid came to the old oak tree
    (Sun and wind and a bird on the bough),
    The throstle he sang merrily—merrily—merrily,
    But the fair maid wept, for sad was she, sad was she,
    Her sweet knight—Oh! where was he?

    He lay dead in the cold, cold ground
    (Moon and stars and rain on the hill),
    In his side and breast were bloody wounds.
    Woe, woe is me for the fair ladye, and the poor knight he,
    The poor knight—Ah! cold was he.

    The maiden sat her down to die
    (Cold, cold earth on her lover’s breast),
    And the little birds rang mournfully,
    And the moonshine kissed her tenderly,
    And the stars looked down right pityingly
    On the poor fair maid and the poor cold knight.
    Ah misery, dear misery, sweet misery!”

This mournful song was no sooner ended than supper was served; and the
company proved themselves good trenchermen.  Hilarius caught sight of the
seditious friar making short work of the Convent’s victuals, and
marvelled to see him in a place to which he had given so evil a name.

Martin was unfeignedly glad to see the lad, and listened intently to his
tale.  He nodded his head as Hilarius related how the friar he companied
with preached in each village that men should repent ere the scourge of
God fell upon them; “but there is naught of it as yet,” said the lad.

“Nay, nay, it is like a thief in the night.  One day it is not; and then
the next, men sicken and fall like blasted wheat.  I heard a bruit of
London that it was but a heap of graves—nay, one grave rather, for they
flung the bodies into a great trench; there was no time to do otherwise:
Black Death is swift with his stroke.”

Then Hilarius told of Piping Hugh and the Friar’s death-words to the
guests.

Martin swore a round oath and slapped his thigh.

“Now know I that thy Friar is a proper man an he has set a curse on
Piping Hugh of Mildenhall!  A foul-mouthed knave, with many a black deed
to his name and blood on his hands, if men say truth; and yet there was
never a bird that would not come at his call, and I never heard tell that
he harmed one.  What will thy Friar in Bungay, lad?”

When he had heard the story of the Friar’s twice-repeated vision and
quest, the Minstrel sat silent awhile with knitted brow and head sunk on
his breast; then he eyed Hilarius half humorously, half tenderly.

“Methinks, lad, an thy Friar alloweth it, I will even go to Bungay with
thee; for I love thee well, lad, and would have thy company.  Also I like
not the matter of the vision and would fain see the end of it.”

That night the dream came again to the Friar, and a voice cried: “Haste,
haste, ere it be too late.”  And so Hilarius and Martin came to Bungay,
the Friar guiding them, for the way was his own.  None of the three ever
saw St Edmund’s Abbey again, for in one short month the minster with its
sister churches was turned to be a spital-house, while the dead lay in
heaps, silently waiting to summon to their ghastly company the living
that sought to make them a bed.

Quaint little Bungay lay snug enough in the embrace of the low
vine-crowned hills which half encircled common and town.  The Friar
strode forward, straining in his pace like a leashed hound; Martin and
Hilarius following.  Once he stopped and turned a stricken face on his
companions.

“What is that?” he said shrilly.

A magpie went ducking across the road, and Hilarius crossed himself
fearfully.

“Let us make haste,” cried the Friar when they told him; and so at full
pace they came to Bungay town.

The place looked empty and deserted, but from the distance came the roar
and hum of an angry crowd.

“The people are abroad,” said Martin, and his face was very grave, “no
doubt some knight is here, and there is a bear-baiting on the common.
Prithee, where is thy mother’s dwelling, good Father, and I will go and
ask news of her?”

“’Tis a lonely hovel by the waterside not far from the Cattle Gate; Goody
Wooten thou shalt ask for.”

Martin went swiftly forward over the Common; Hilarius and the Friar
followed more slowly, and when they came to the Cattle Gate they stood
fast and waited, the Friar turning his head anxiously and straining to
make his ears do a double service.

Hilarius, who had hitherto regarded Bungay and the Friar’s business as
the last stage of his journey to Wymondham and Brother Andreas, was full
of foreboding; he watched Martin on the outskirts of the crowd, saw him
throw up his hands with an angry gesture and point to the Friar.  Then he
fell to parleying with the people, but Hilarius was too far off to catch
what was said.

“See there, ’tis her son,” Martin was saying vehemently; “yon holy friar
hath seen this thing in a vision, but alack! he reads it otherwise; yea,
and hath hasted hither from overseas to wrestle with the Evil One for his
mother’s soul—and now, and now—”

The crowd parted, and he saw the most miserable sight.  An old woman lay
on the ground by the river’s edge; a bundle of filthy water-logged rags
crowned by a bruised, vindictive face and grey hair smeared with filth
and slime.  She lay on her back a shapeless huddle; her right thumb tied
to her left toe and so across: there was a rope about her middle, but in
their hot haste they had not stayed to strip her.

Martin pressed forward, and then turning to the jeering, vengeful crowd:

“By Christ’s Rood, this is an evil work ye have wrought,” he said.

“Nay,” said one of the bystanders, “but it was fair judgment, Minstrel.
For years she hath worked her spells and black arts in this place, ay,
and cattle have perished and women gone barren through her means.  Near
two days agone a child was lost and seen last near her door, ay, and
never seen again.  When we came to question her she cursed at us for
meddling mischief-makers, and would but glare and spit, and swear she
knew naught of the misbegotten brat.”

“Maybe ’twas true eno’,” said Martin.  “I hate these rough-cast
witch-findings—’tis not a matter for man’s judgment, unless ’tis sworn
and proven in court before the Justiciary.”

“Nay,” joined in an old man, “what need of a Justice when God speaks?  We
did but thole her to the river to see if she would sink or swim.  The
witch did swim, as all can testify, her Master helping her; and seeing
that, we drew her under—ay, and see her now as she lies, and say whether
the Devil hath not set a mark on his own?”

Martin wrung his hands.

“For the love of Christ, lay her decently on her pallet, and say no word
of this to yon holy man.”

Moved by his earnest manner, one or two more kindly folk busied
themselves unfastening the ropes and thongs which bound the witch, and
bore her to her wretched bed.

The people, in their previous eagerness, had torn down the front of the
miserable hovel she called home, so all men could see the poor place and
its dead dishonoured mistress.

Martin, finding his bidding accomplished, turned to meet Hilarius and the
Friar who were now coming slowly across the windswept common.  March
mists gathered and draped the sluggish river; the dry reeds rattled
dismally in the ooze and sedge.  Hilarius shivered, and the Friar started
nervously when Martin spoke.

“Friar,” he said, “God comfort thee!  After all thy pains thou art too
late to speed thy mother’s soul; she passed to-day, and lies even now
awaiting burial at thy faithful hands.”

The Friar drew a quick breath, and Hilarius questioned Martin with a
look.  The crowd parted to let them through, and hung their heads abashed
in painful silence as the Friar, led by Hilarius, gave his blessing.

They were close to the mean hovel now, and he turned to Martin.

“Didst thou hear of her end, or did she die alone, for the people feared
her?”

“Ay, she died alone,” answered Martin, and muttered, “now God forgive
me!” under his breath.

As they went into the wretched shed the setting sun broke through the
lowering grey clouds and shone full on the dead woman.  It lighted each
vicious line and hideous trait of the wrinkled, toothless face, and
betrayed the mark of an evil life, surcharged with horrid fear.

Hilarius shrank back shuddering.  Could this hideousness be death?  The
Friar stepped forward, but Martin stayed him.

“Nay, touch her not, Father, it may be the pestilence as thou didst read
in thy dream.”

The Friar fell on his knees; and, in the silence that followed was heard
the drip, drip, drip, from the sodden rags on the beaten earth floor.
The people without, staring, open-mouthed and silent, saw the Friar look
up; his hand hastily outstretched touched the dank, muddy hair; then he
knew all, and fell on his face with an exceeding bitter cry.  It was
answered by another cry—the glad cry of a lost child that is found.

                                * * * * *

The Friar, standing in front of that hovel of death, preached to the
cringing, terrified people, many of whom knelt and crouched in the
down-trodden grass and quag.  He threw up his arms, and turned his blind,
anguished face to the setting sun.

“Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel but
not of Me, that they may add sin to sin.  Darkness shall come upon them;
Death shall overtake them; their place shall know them no more.  Let them
bare their backs to the scourge, let them confess and repent ere I visit
them as I visited Sodom and Gomorrah, cities of the Plain.

“O ye people, ye have taken judgment in your hands and judged falsely
withal; but ye shall be judged in truth, yea, even according to your
measure.  Repent, repent, for Death cometh swiftly and maketh no long
tarrying.  It shall come; it shall snatch men’s souls away, even as ye
have torn away my mother’s soul, leaving no space for repentance.”

He stretched his hands out over the common, and pointed to the little
town.

“Your dwellings shall be desolate, and this place a place of heaps.  Ye
shall run hither and thither, seeking safety and finding none; for the
arm of the Lord is stretched out still because of the wickedness of the
earth.  Woe, woe, woe, a disobedient and gainsaying people!  Woe, woe,
woe, a people hating righteousness and loving iniquity!  The Lord shall
straightway destroy them from off the face of the earth.”

He made an imperative gesture of dismissal, and first one and then
another in the crowd turned to slink home like beaten dogs, snarling,
growling, but afraid.

Hilarius and Martin buried the witch at the back of her wretched den; and
the Friar, the priest lost in the son, prayed long by the else unhallowed
grave, and Martin prayed beside him.

Hilarius stood apart, his lips set straight, and said no prayer; for what
availed it to pray for an unassoilzied witch who had met her due, damned
alike by God and man?

Martin came up to him.

“She was his mother,” he said, as if making excuse.

Hilarius stared in bewilderment.  His mother?  Ay, but an evil liver; and
the people of Bungay had wrought a good work in sending her to her own
place.  He crossed himself piously at the thought of the near
neighbourhood of devils busied with a thrice-damned soul.

Martin led them out of Bungay by the Earsham road, and the Friar clung to
him like a little child, for the strength of his vision was spent.  They
lay that night with a friendly shepherd; but only one slept, and that one
Hilarius.  He lay on a truss of sweet-smelling hay, and dreamt of
Wymondham and Brother Andreas; of gold, vermilion and blue; of wondrous
pictures, and a great name: and the scent of the pine forest at home
swept across his quiet sleep.

On the morrow came the parting of the ways, for Hilarius was all aglow
for Wymondham, and Martin had charged himself with the Friar at least as
far as Norwich.

“As well lead a blind friar as sing blindly at another’s bidding,” he
said whimsically, and so they bade one another farewell never to meet
again in this world: for Martin and the Friar went to Yarmouth, not
Norwich, and there they perished among the first when the east wind swept
the Plague thither in a boat-load of sickened shipmen.  And Hilarius—once
again the Angel of the Lord stood in the path of his desires.



CHAPTER VII
THE COMING OF HUNGER AND LOVE


HILARIUS fared but slowly; it was ill travelling on a high-road in good
weather, but on a cross-road in the spring!—that was a time to commend
oneself body and soul to the Saints.  He walked warily, picking his way
in and out of the bog between fence and ditch, which was all that
remained to show where the piety of the past once kept a road.  The low
land to his left was submerged, a desolate tract giving back a sullen
grey sky, lifeless, barren, save where a gaunt poplar like the mast of a
sunken ship broke the waste of waters.

The sight brought Hilarius’ thoughts sharply back to the events of the
evening before.  Wonderful indeed were the judgments of God!  A
witch—plainly proved to be such—had been struck dead in the midst of her
sins; and London, that light-minded, reprobate city, was a heap of
graves.  Now he, Hilarius, having seen much evil and the justice of the
Almighty, would get him in peace to Wymondham, there to learn to be a
cunning limner; and having so learnt would joyfully hie him back to Prior
Stephen and his own monastery.

Presently the way led somewhat uphill, and he saw to his right a small
hamlet.  It lay some distance off his road, but he was sharp-set, for the
shepherd’s fare had been meagre; and so turned aside in the hope of an
ale-house.  There was no side road visible, and he struck across the
dank, marshy fields until he lighted on a rude track which led to the
group of cottages.  The place struck him as strangely quiet; no smoke
rose from the chimneys; no dogs rushed out barking furiously at a
stranger’s advent.  The first hovel he passed was empty, the open door
showed a fireless hearth.  At the second he knocked and heard a sound of
scuffling within.  As no one answered his repeated summons he pushed the
door open; the low room was desolate, but two bright eyes peered at him
from a corner,—’twas a rat.  Hilarius turned away, sudden fear at his
heart, and passed on, finding in each hovel only empty silence.

Apart from the rest, standing alone in a field, was a somewhat larger
cottage; a bush swung from the projecting pole above the door: it was the
ale-house that he sought; here, at least, he would find some one.  As he
came up he heard a child crying, and lo! on the doorstep sat a dirty
little maid of some four summers, sobbing away for dear life.

Hilarius approached diffidently, and stooped down to wipe away the grimy
tears.

The child regarded him, round eyes, open mouth; then with a shrill cry of
joy, she held out her thin arms.

At the sound of her cry the door opened; on the threshold stood a woman
still young but haggard and weary-eyed; at her breast was a little babe.
She stared at Hilarius, and then pulling the child to her in the doorway,
waved him away.

“Stand off, fool!—’tis the Plague.”

Hilarius shrank back.

“And thy neighbours?” he asked.

“Nay, they were light-footed eno’ when they saw what was to do, and left
us three to die like rats in a hole.”  Then eagerly: “Hast thou any
bread?”

He shook his head.

“Nay, I came here seeking some.  Art thou hungry?”

She threw out her hands.

“’Tis two days sin’ I had bite or sup.”

“Where lies the nearest village? and how far?”

“A matter of an hour, over yonder.”

“See, goodwife,” said Hilarius, “I will go buy thee food and come again.”

She looked at him doubtfully.

“So said another, and he never came back.”

“Nay, but perchance some evil befell him,” said gentle Hilarius.

“Well, I will trust thee.”  She went in and returned with a few small
coins.  “’Tis all I have.  Tell no man whence thou art, else they will
hunt thee from their doors.”

Hilarius nodded, took the money, and ran as fast as he could go in the
direction of the village.

The woman watched him.

“Is it fear or love that lends him that pace?” she muttered, as she sat
down to wait.

It was love.

Hilarius entered the village discreetly, and adding the little money he
had to the woman’s scanty store, bought bread, a flask of wine, flour and
beans, and a jug of milk.

“’Tis for a sick child,” he said when he asked for it, and the woman
pushed back the money, bidding him God-speed.

The return journey was accomplished much more slowly, because of his
precious burden; and as he crossed a field, there, dead in a snare, lay a
fine coney.

“Now hath Our Lady herself had thought for the poor mother!” cried
Hilarius joyously, and added it to his store.

When he reached the cottage, and the woman saw the food, she broke into
loud weeping, for her need had been great; then, as if giving up the
struggle to another and a stronger, she sank on the bed with her
fast-failing babe in her arms.

Hilarius fed her carefully with bread and wine—not for nothing had he
served the Infirmarian when blood-letting had proved too severe for some
weak Brother—and then turned his attention to the little maid who sat
patient, eyeing the food.

For her, bread and milk.  He sat down on a low stool, and taking the
child on his knee slowly supplied the gaping, bird-like mouth.  At last
the little maid heaved a sigh of content, leant her flaxen head against
her nurse’s shoulder, and fell fast asleep.

Hilarius, cradling her carefully in gentle arms, crooned softly to her,
thrilling with tenderness.  She was his own, his little sister, the child
he had found and saved.  Surely Our Lady had guided him to her, and her
great Mother-love would shield this little one from a foul and horrid
death.  In that dirty, neglected room, the child warm against his breast,
Hilarius lived the happiest moments of his life.

Presently he rose, for there was much to be done, kissed the little pale
cheek, noted fearfully the violet shadows under the closed eyes, and laid
his new-found treasure on the bed by her mother.

The woman was half-asleep, but started awake.

“Art thou going?” she said, and despair gazed at him from her eyes.

“Nay, nay, surely not until we all go together,” he said soothingly.  “I
would but kindle a fire, for the cold is bitter.”

Wood was plentiful, and soon a bright fire blazed on the hearth.  The
poor woman, heartened by her meal, rose and came to sit by it, and
stretching out her thin hands to the grateful warmth, told her tale.

“’Twas Gammer Harden’s son who first heard tell of a strange new sickness
at Caxton’s; and then Jocell had speech with a herd from those parts, who
was fleeing to a free town, because of some ill he had done.  Next day
Jocell fell sick with vomitings, and bleeding, and breaking out of boils,
and in three days he lay dead; and Gammer Harden fell sick and died
likewise.  Then one cried ’twas the Plague, and the wrath of God; and
they fled—the women to the nuns at Bungay, and the men to seek work or
shelter on the Manor; but us they left, for I was with child.”

“And thy husband?’ said Hilarius.

“Nay, he was not my husband, but these are his children, his and mine.
Some hold ’tis a sin to live thus, and perhaps because of it this evil
hath fallen upon me.”

She looked at the babe lying on her lap, its waxen face drawn and shrunk
with the stress of its short life.

Hilarius spoke gently:—

“It is indeed a grievous sin against God and His Church to live together
out of holy wedlock, and perchance ’tis true that for this very thing
thou hast been afflicted, even as David the great King.  But since thou
didst sin ignorantly the Lord in His mercy sent me to serve thee in thy
sore need; ay, and in very truth, Our Lady herself showed me where the
coney lay snared.  Let us pray God by His dear Mother to forgive us our
sins and to have mercy on these little ones.”

And kneeling there in the firelight he besought the great Father for his
new-found family.

Five days passed, and despite extreme care victuals were short.  Hilarius
dug up roots from the hedgerows, and went hungry, but at last the pinch
came; the woman was too weak and ill to walk, the babe scarce in
life—there could be no thought of flight—and the little maid grew white,
and wan and silent.  Then it came to Hilarius that he would once again
beg food in the village where he had sought help before.

He went slowly, for he had eaten little that his maid might be the better
fed, and he was very sad.  When he reached the village he found his
errand like to be vain.  News of the Plague was coming from many parts,
and each man feared for his own skin.  At every house they questioned
him: “Art thou from a hamlet where the Plague hath been?” and when he
answered “Yea,” the door was shut.

Very soon men, angry and afraid, came to drive him from the place.  He
gained the village cross, and prayed them for love of the Saviour and His
holy Rood to give him bread for his little maid and her mother.  Let them
set it in the street, he would take it and cross no man’s threshold.
Surely they could not; for shame, let a little child die of want?

“Nay, ’tis better they die, so are we safe,” cried a voice; then they
fell upon him and beat him, and drove him from the village with blows and
curses.

Bruised and panting, he ran from them, and at last the chase ceased;
breathless and exhausted he flung himself under a hedge.

A hawk swooped, struck near him, and rose again with its prey.  Hilarius
shuddered; but perhaps the hawk had nestlings waiting open-mouthed for
food?  His little maid!  His eyes filled with tears as he thought of
those who awaited him.  He picked up a stone, and watched if perchance a
coney might show itself.  He had never killed, but were not his nestlings
agape?

Nothing stirred, but along the road came a waggon of strange shape and
gaily painted.

He rose to his feet, praying the great Mother to send him help in his
awful need.

The waggon drew near; the driver sat asleep upon the shaft, the horse
took his own pace.  It passed him before he could pluck up heart to ask
an alms, and from the back dangled a small sack and a hen.  If he begged
and was refused his little maid must die.  A minute later the sack and
the hen had changed owners—but not unobserved; a clear voice called a
halt; the waggon stood fast; two figures sprang out, a girl and a boy:
and Hilarius stood before them on the white highway—a thief.

“Seize the knave!” cried the girl sharply.

Hilarius stared at her and she at him.  It was his dancer, and she knew
him, ay, despite the change of dress and scene, she knew him.

“What!  The worthy novice turned worldling and thief!  Nay, ’tis a rare
jest.  What of thy fine sermons now, good preacher?”

But Hilarius answered never a word; overcome by shame, grief, and hunger,
sudden darkness fell upon him.

When he came to himself he was sitting propped against the hedge; the
waggon was drawn up by the roadside, and the dancer and her brother stood
watching him.

“Fetch bread and wine,” said the girl, and to Hilarius who tried to
speak, “Peace, ’til thou hast eaten.”

Hilarius ate eagerly, and when he had made an end the dancer said:—

“Now tell thy tale.  Prithee, since when didst thou leave thy Saints and
thy nursery for such an ill trade as this?”

Hilarius told her all, and when he had finished he wept because of his
little maid, and his were not the only tears.

The dancer went to the waggon and came back with much food taken from her
store, to which she added the hen; the sack held but fodder.

“But, Gia,” grumbled her brother, “there will be naught for us to-night.”

“Thou canst eat bread, or else go hungry,” she retorted, and filled a
small sack with the victuals.

Hilarius watched her, hardly daring to hope.  She held it out to him:
“Now up and off to thy little maid.”

Hilarius took the sack, but only to lay it down again.  Kneeling, he took
both her little brown hands, and his tears fell fast as he kissed them.

“Maid, maid, canst forgive my theft, ay, and my hard words in the forest?
God help me for a poor, blind fool!”

“Nay,” she answered, “there is naught to forgive; and see, thou hast
learnt to hunger and to love!  Farewell, little brother, we pass here
again a fortnight hence, and I would fain have word of thy little maid.
Ay, and shouldst thou need a home for her, bring her to us; my old
grandam is in the other waggon and she will care for her.”

Hilarius ran across the fields, full of sorrow for his sin, and yet
greatly glad because of the wonderful goodness of God.

When he got back his little maid sat alone by the fire.  He hastened to
make food ready, but the child was far spent and would scarcely eat.
Then he went out to find the woman.

He saw her standing in the doorway of an empty hovel, and she cried to
him to keep back.

“My babe is dead, and I feel the sickness on me.  I went to the houses
seeking meal, even to Gammer Harden’s; and I must die.  As for thee, thou
shalt not come near me, but bide with the child; so maybe God will spare
the innocent.”

Hilarius besought her long that she would at least suffer him to bring
her food, but she would not.

“Nay, I could not eat, the fever burns in my bones; let me alone that I
may die the sooner.”

Hilarius went back with a heavy heart, and lay that night with the little
maid in his arms on the settle by the hearth.  Despite his fear he slept
heavily and late: when he rose the sun was high and the child awake.

He fed her, and, bidding her bide within, went out to gain tidings of the
poor mother.  He called, but no one answered; and the door of the hovel
in which she had taken shelter stood wide.  Then, as he searched the
fields, fearing the fever had driven her abroad, he saw the flutter of
garments in a ditch; and lo! there lay the woman, dead, with her dead
babe on her breast.  She had lain down to die alone with God in the
silence, that haply the living might escape; and on her face was peace.

Later, Hilarius laid green boughs tenderly over mother and babe, and
covered them with earth, saying many prayers.  Then he went back to his
fatherless, motherless maid.

She ailed naught that he could see, and there was food and to spare; but
each day saw her paler and thinner, until at last she could not even sit,
but lay white and silent in Hilarius’ tender arms; and he fought with
death for his little maid.

Then on a day she would take no food, and when Hilarius put tiny morsels
in her mouth she could not swallow; and so he sat through the long hours,
his little maid in his arms, with no thought beside.  The darkness came,
and he waited wide-eyed, praying for the dawn.  When the new day broke
and the east was pale with light he carried the child out that he might
see her, for a dreadful fear possessed him.  And it came to pass that
when the light kissed her little white face she opened her eyes and
smiled at Hilarius, and so smiling, died.

The dancer, true to her promise, scanned the road as the waggon drew near
the place of Hilarius’ first and last theft: he was standing by the
wayside alone.  The waggon passed on carrying him with it; and the dancer
looked but once on his face and asked no question.




_PART III_
THE FRUIT


CHAPTER I
HOW LONG, O LORD, HOW LONG!


THE Monastery by the forest pursued an even existence, with no great
event to trouble its serenity, for it lay too far west for the Plague to
be more than a terrible name.

True, there had been dissension when Prior Stephen, summoned to Cluny by
the Abbat, had perforce left the dominion to the Sub-Prior.  For lo! the
Sub-Prior, a mild and most amiable man in his own estate, had proved
harsh and overbearing in government.  Ay, and in an irate mood he had
fallen upon Brother William, the Sacrist, in the Frater, plucked out his
hair and beaten him sore; whereat the Convent was no little scandalized,
and counselled Brother William to resign his office.  He flouted the
Chamberlain also, and Brother Roger the Hospitaller, and so affronted the
Brethren that when he began to sing the _Verba mea_ on leaving the
chapter, the Convent—yea, even the novices—were silent, to show their
displeasure.

When Prior Stephen returned he was exceeding wroth, but said little; only
he took from the Sub-Prior his office, and all that appertained thereto,
and made him as one of the other monks; and Brother William, who was a
gentle and devout servant of God, he made Sub-Prior in his stead; and the
Convent was at peace.

Brother Ambrose, he to whom the vision was vouchsafed, had slipped
through the grey veil which once hid Jerusalem from his longing gaze;
Brother Richard was now in the land where the blind receive their sight;
and Brother Thomas the Cellarer—but of him let us say little and think
with charity; for ’tis to be feared that he greatly abused his office and
is come to judgment.

Two of the older monks, Brother Anselm and Brother Paul, who had spent
fifty years in the sheltered peace of the Monastery walls, sat warming
their tired old limbs in the south cloister, for the summer sunshine was
very pleasant to them.

“Since Brother Thomas died—” began Brother Paul.

“The Lord have mercy on his soul!” ejaculated Brother Anselm.

“Since Brother Thomas died,” said Brother Paul again—a little
impatiently, though he crossed himself piously enough—“methinks the
provisions have oft been scanty and far from tempting, Brother.”

“Ay, and the wine,” said Brother Anselm.  “Methinks our Cellarer draws
the half of it from the Convent’s well.”

They shook their heads sadly.

“No doubt,” said Brother Anselm after a short silence, “our Cellarer is
most worthy, strict, and honest in the performance of his office—while
Brother Thomas, alack—”

“Methinks Brother Edmund is somewhat remiss also in his duties,” said
Brother Paul.  “The Prior, holy man, perceives nothing of these things.
On Sunday’s feast one served him with a most unsavoury mess in the
refectory, the dish thereof being black and broken; yet he ate the meat
in great content, and seemingly with appetite.”

“He is but young, he is but young—sixty come Michaelmas—sixty, and
twenty-two years Prior—’tis a long term,” and Brother Anselm nodded his
head.

“Ay, he is still young, and of sound teeth,” said Brother Paul, “whereas
thou and I, Brother, are as babes needing pap-meat.  Brother Thomas—God
rest his soul!—was wont to give savoury mess easy of eating to the elder
Brethren.”

“Ay, he was a kind man with all his faults,” said Brother Anselm,
fingering his toothless gums.  “Think you ’twould be well to speak of
this matter to the Prior?”

“Nay, nay,” said the other, “he is ever against any store being set on
the things of this world—‘’tis well for the greater discipline of the
flesh,’ so saith he ever.  Still he hath forbidden the blood-letting to
us elder Brethren.”

“Methinks there is little to let, since Brother Thomas died,” said
Brother Anselm ruefully.

“Nay, then, let us seek out the Cellarer and admonish him—maybe he will
hear a word in season,” and the two old monks moved slowly away to the
Cellarer’s office as Prior Stephen came down the cloister walk.

He looked little older, his carriage was upright as ever, but government
sat heavy upon him; the keen, ascetic face was weary, and the line of the
lips showed care.  His thoughts were busy with Hilarius.  It was now full
six years that the lad had left the Monastery, and since the Christmas
after his going no news had come of him, save that he never reached St
Alban’s.  Had the Plague gathered him as it gathered many another
well-beloved son?  Or had the awakening proved too sudden for the lad set
blind-eyed without the gate?

He passed from the cloister into the garth where bloomed the lilies that
Hilarius had loved so well.  He looked at the row of nameless graves with
the great Rood for their common memorial; last but one lay the
resting-place of Brother Richard, and the blind monk’s dying speech had
been of the lad whose face he had strained his eyes to see.

Prior Stephen stood by the farmery door, and the scent of Mary’s flowers
came to him as it had come to Hilarius at the gate.  He stretched out his
hands with the strange pathetic gesture of a strong man helpless.  It was
all passing fair: the fields of pale young corn trembling in the gentle
breeze; the orchards and vineyards with fast maturing fruit; the meadows
where the sleek kine browsed languidly in the warm summer sunshine.
Peace and prosperity everywhere; the old Church springing into new beauty
as the spire rose slowly skywards; peace and prosperity, new glories for
the House of the Lord; and yet, and yet, his heart ached for his own
helplessness, and for the exceeding longing that he had for the boy whose
mother once held that heart in the hollow of her little hand.

Ah well, blessed be God who had called him from the things of this world
to the service of Christ and the Church!  Once again he offered himself
in the flame of his desires: he would fast and pray and wait.

The Office bell sounded sharp and clear across the still summer air
calling to Vespers, and the Prior hasted to his place.

“_Qui seminant in lachrymis in exultatione metent_,” chanted the deep
voices of the monks, and Prior Stephen’s voice trembled as he joined in
the Psalmody.

“_Euntes ibant et flebant mittentes semina sua_.  _Venientes autem
venient cum exultatione portantes manipulos suos_.”

He had sown in tears, ay, and was weary of the sowing; but the harvesting
was not yet.



CHAPTER II
MARY’S LILIES


IT came to pass upon a certain day scarce a se’nnight later, that Prior
Stephen was troubled in his mind by reason of a dream which came to him.

It happened on this wise.  He was sitting by his window after the noon
repast, musing, as he was wont, on his dear son.  The song of the bees
busy in the herb-garden was very pleasant to his ear, the warm, still air
overcame him, and he slept.  Suddenly he heard a voice calling—a voice he
knew in every fibre of his being and yet could set no name to, for it was
the voice of God.  He arose in haste and went out into the garth, and lo!
under the lilies Hilarius lay sleeping.  The Prior stood fast in great
wonder, his heart leaping for joy; yet he could not cross the little
piece of grass that lay between the cloister and the farmery door.

As he watched, a woman, light of foot and of great beauty, came swiftly
from the gate to where Hilarius slept; and the Prior was grieved, and
marvelled that the porter had opened to such an one; for it was a grave
scandal that a woman should set foot within the Monastery precincts.  He
strove to cry, but his voice died on his lips, and his feet were as lead.

The woman stayed when she came to the sleeping lad, and stooped to arouse
him, but he slept on.  She called him, and her voice was as the calling
of the summer sea on a shelving beach; but Hilarius gave no heed.  Then,
in great impatience, she caught at the white lilies under which he lay;
and, as she broke the flower-crowned stems, Hilarius stirred and cried
out in his sleep, whereat she plucked the faster.  Of a sudden Prior
Stephen was as one set free.  He strode to the woman’s side: there was
but one lily left.  He laid his hand on her shoulder, for speech was
still far from him: and she fell back from the one remaining blossom with
a cry of fear—and Prior Stephen awoke, for behold! it was a dream; but he
was sore troubled.

“Maybe,” said he, “evil threatens the lad, such evil as slew his mother,
on whom God have mercy!”  And sighing heavily he took his way to the
great Rood and made supplication for his son.

                                * * * * *

Far away, under a southern sky, in one of the great palaces of Florence,
there stood a woman of fair stature, with tight-clenched hands, whose
many jewels bit the tender flesh.  Her russet eyes flashed under
threatening brows, her teeth held fast the curling upper lip.  Great,
alack! was her fame: men crept to her knee like spaniels craving favour.
Great was her wealth: a golden piece for every ruddy strand that hung a
shimmering mantle to her knee.  Her beauty—nay, men had slain themselves
gladly to escape the torment of her look.  She stood in the curtained
doorway, a heavy purple hanging at her back; and the man who awaited her
paled as he saw her vengeful face.

It was Hilarius.  He drew himself up to the full of his slender height,
and bowed.

Panting a little, the woman came towards him across the many-hued marble
floors; and, as she passed, a vase of great white lilies caught in her
draperies of cramoisie and fell.  She gave no heed, but swept on, and
faced him in the sunny silence.  Across the pause the Angelus sounded
from a church hard by: Hilarius crossed himself devoutly; and the
stillness fled before a woman’s scornful laugh.

“Nay, then, Signor,” she cried mockingly, “is ours to be a war of signs
and silence?  I have heard thy lips were ready enough with judgment,
though they halt at a love-phrase.  By Our Lady, if all that is said of
thee be true, I will e’en have thee whipped at the gibbet for thy gibes!
Speak, fool, while thy tongue is left thee; ’tis a last asking.  Wilt
thou paint this face of mine that is, it seems, so little to thy liking?
Strain not my patience over much—’tis a slender cord at best, and
somewhat tried already.  Speak, is it yea or nay?”

Hilarius looked away to where Mary’s flowers lay bruised and scattered on
the flag of blood-red marble; his answer came low and clear:—

“‘It is nay.’”

She thrust her head forward, and looked at him wondering; there was a
stain where her teeth had been busy.

“‘It is nay,’” she repeated after him, and her eyes mocked him.  “May a
poor Princess ask the Signor’s reason?”

Hilarius pointed past her to the fallen lilies.

“It lies there.”

For an instant the hot colour splashed the angry whiteness of her cheek;
then, pale to the lips, she turned on him; and she stammered in her
wrath:—

“And dost thou—dost thou dare, say this to my face—to me, who stooped to
ask when I had but to command?  I, with my unmatched beauty; I, who hold
the hearts of men in thrall to the lifting of my eyes; I, to whom men
kneel as to their God!  Art thou mad, mad, that thou canst set aside such
a behest as mine?  ’Tis small wonder men say thy doublet hides a monkish
dress; of a truth the tale they brought savoured of little else.  Hear
me, thou prating, milk-faced Modesty, I choose that thou shalt limn this
face of mine: say me nay, and I will teach thee a lesson hard of
forgetting; for I will silence thy preaching for aye, and lend my
serving-men to whip thee through the streets.  Men, said I?  Nay, thou
art too much a cur to make fit sport for men: rather my maids shall wield
the rod and lace thy shoulders.”

She flung herself on a low couch by the open window, where the peacocks
on the terrace strutted in the sun; and Hilarius waited, dumb as the dog
to which she had likened him, for he had no word.

There was silence a while.

Then the Princess spoke, and her voice cut Hilarius like the sting of a
lash:—

“Bring me yon flowers.”

He obeyed.

“Set them at my feet.”

He bent his knee and did so, wondering.

A moment, and she trod them under; their dying fragrance filled the air,
as their living breath had flooded the senses of the blind-eyed lad at
the Monastery gate.

One by one she set her heel upon the blossoms, and the marble was yellow
with stolen gold.

Hilarius held his breath; it was as if she did to death some living
thing, and yet he dared not bid her stay her insolent feet.

It was done; and she looked at him under questioning brows.

“So much for thy lilies!  Dost still think that it will soil thy brush to
limn such an one as I?  I, whom men call the Queen of Love—but thy lips,
say they, burnt with another name!  Bethink thee, faint heart, there is
not a man in all this city but would count death a small price to pay for
my favours; and I ask of thee one little service, and thou shalt name
thine own reward.  Surely ’tis churlish to gainsay!”

Her voice was suddenly sweet.

Stooping, she gathered to her the destruction she had wrought, fingering
the fallen petals tenderly, with a little sigh.  She glanced up at
Hilarius through her lashes’ net.  “Maybe I was over hasty,” she said
softly, and a sob swelled the round of her wonderful throat—“and yet how
couldst thou call me wanton?”  Her mouth drooped a little—she was very
fair.

“Art thou still minded to set these poor pale flowers against the roses
in love’s garden?  For I love thee,” she added, and then suddenly she was
still.

Hilarius looked from the dead flowers to the woman in her over-mastering
beauty, and all at once the passion that lies hid in the heart of every
man leapt to his lips.  He desired this woman as he had never before
desired aught in all the world, and he knew, to his shame, that she was
his for the asking.  The blood thudded and rang in his veins; he feasted
his eyes on the curve of her neck and the radiance of her sun-swept hair.
He stretched out his hands, but ere he could speak she raised a white,
terrified face, and glanced over her shoulder.

“Who touched me?” she gasped, her voice shrill with fear, “who touched
me?”  And she sprang to her feet.

There was no one: the two shared a common pallor as they stared into each
other’s eyes across the dying lilies.  Hilarius shrank back and covered
his face with his hands.  Clear and distinct he heard the Prior’s voice:
“_A light woman—a light woman_.”

Then the Princess said hoarsely, “Go, go;” and without word or look
Hilarius went.

                                * * * * *

The Prior rose from his knees comforted.  He had wrestled with the devil
for his son’s soul, and knew that he had prevailed.



CHAPTER III
OPEN EYES AT THE GATE


ANOTHER year wrote its record on forest and field.  The weeks passed;
summer sped to autumn, the ripe corn bowed to the sickle.  The Convent’s
lands were rich and heavy, virgin soil reclaimed; and the Prior, watching
the last great wain piled high with wealth of golden treasure, saw the
porter coming to him.

Now the porter was stout, short of breath, and of a hasty spirit; and the
Prior knew something was amiss by reason of his hurried gait and wrathful
countenance.

“Domine,” he gasped, “Domine, there is a ragged man at the gate, a
vagabond by his own showing, and he craves speech of thee.  I bade him go
to the guest-house, but he will not budge, and hath waited already an
hour despite my—”

The porter stayed, staring; he spoke to the wind; the Prior was already
halfway to the gate.

“This my son was dead and is alive again,” sang his heart.  The porter,
afraid, hasted after him with the keys, and had scarce time to do his
office ere the sunburnt vagabond was clasped in the Prior’s arms.  It was
a harvesting indeed.

That night Hilarius went across to the Prior’s house to tell the tale of
his journeyings.  He found him seated in a great oak chair by the open
window; the sky was ablaze with stars, and the flame of the oil lamp
jarred like a splash of yellow paint on the moonlight which flooded the
room; the Prior’s eyes smiled measureless content, and the murmured
“_Laus Deo_” of his lips voiced the gladness of his heart.  Thus, in the
shelter of peace and a great love, Hilarius told his tale, while the
forest waved a welcome to him over the Monastery wall, and the late
lilies burned white in the garth below.

The Prior sat with his chin in his hand, his eyes fixed on the lad’s
face, pale against the dark wainscot; and Hilarius told of his
journeyings, and all that befell, even as it hath been recorded in this
chronicle; and the Prior’s eyes were wet as he heard of the little maid.

“And then, my son?” said the Prior.

“Then, my Father, I companied with the caravan folk as far as the
sea-coast; and, leaving them there, went overseas in the train of my lord
Bishop Robert Walter of Norwich, who was hasting to Rome.  He knew thee,
my Father, and bade his people supply my needs.”

“Ay, he knows me,” said the Prior briefly.  “The Lord reward him
according to his works, but show him mercy forasmuch as he had compassion
on my son!”

“Then saw I Rome, my Father, that great and beauteous city full of
treasure and many wonders; only the Holy Father I did not see, being let.
Methinks life in that country is as one long pageant; but I marked that
great holiness and an evil life, much riches and much penury, dwelt there
side by side, and men reeked little of death but much of pleasure.  Then
one bade me go to Florence an I would be a limner; therefore I hasted
thither, and gave my last coin for bread as I entered the city.”

The Prior’s brows contracted; the lad had seen some schooling.

“But thou didst learn to be a limner, my son?”

“Ay, my Father, in God’s time: at first I must herd goats and sell melons
in the market-place for a lump of bread.  Day by day I strove to gain
enough to buy colours, but could not, for the Lord sent me ever a
neighbour poorer than myself.  Nevertheless I was of good courage,
knowing the Lord’s ways are not as ours; and mindful how Brother Ambrose
held that inasmuch as the Heavenly City is laid with fair colours ’twere
no sin to deem that a man may limn perfect pictures there, for the gift
is from the Lord.”

“My son, ’tis a great lesson thou hast learnt,” said the Prior, “for the
Word was made Flesh; and as Blessed John hath it, a man cannot love God
unseen, if he love not the brother whom He hath given him.  What next,
dear lad?”

“My Father, the Lord Himself sent a messenger to me.  One day a great
limner, the Signor Andrea di Cione, whom men call d’Orcagna, stayed by me
where I stood with my melons in the shadow of the Shepherd’s Tower, and
bade me follow him to his house, for he would fain use me for an angel’s
head in the great Altar-piece he was e’en then concerned with for the
Church of the White Friars.  Later he heard my story; and when he found I
had some small skill with the brush, he kept me with him, and taught me
as only such an one can teach: him I served five years.  And many times
Satan desired my soul; nay, once I was in peril of hell-fire, but the
Lord was with me, and plucked my feet out of the pit.  But of that I will
speak anon, at my shriving, as is meet.”

The Prior remembered his dream, but he said no word, and Hilarius took up
his tale.

“Then one day my master cried there was an end to teaching; nevertheless
he would have me bide with him in honour for the work.  But my heart was
full of longing for home and the scent of the forest; and, above all, for
thee, my Father; therefore I set my face north, that I might bring back
my gift to St Benedict and our Church; and should have been here long ere
this, but I was let by the way.”

The Prior looked up a little anxiously, and Hilarius smiled at the
question in his face.

“’Tis a lawless tract, my Father, under the shadow of the great mountains
beyond Florence; and I was taken by robbers, who bore me and others of
our company to their fastness in the hills: there I lay in a little cave
many days; but what befell the rest I know not.  The robbers brought me
forth to serve them, and by God’s mercy handled me kindly, though they
thought little of bloodshedding.

“Then one of them was troubled in his spirit, and minded to forsake this
evil manner of life.  Therefore one night he fled, carrying me with him,
when the others had gone forth; and we made good our way to Mantua.
There Pietro, for so was the robber called, left me that he might give
himself to the service of God and men, inasmuch as he had formerly abused
them.  Never saw I man so changed, my Father; his speech, formerly
profane, was all of God and the Saints; he did penance and confessed his
sins publicly; ay, by the Justice’s order he received one hundred lashes
in the market-place, and at every lash he cried with upturned face, ‘_Deo
Gratias_!’  And I was there, because he besought of me to stand in the
crowd and pray for him that his courage failed not.  But it came to pass
that even the people marvelled at his joyful endurance; and indeed ’twas
more like a scourging of one of the blessed martyrs than of a poor sinful
robber.  After this the Brothers of the Poor took him, for such was his
desire; and so I bade him farewell, and craved his blessing.”

“The Lord fulfil all his mind!” said the Prior with clasped hands.

“Amen,” said Hilarius.

“Didst thou not fear to journey further alone, my son?”

“Nay, my Father, I found for the most part good and kindly men by the
way, despite their somewhat evil seeming; but at Genoa I took service
with a merchant then beginning his journey, and travelled with him
through Flanders, a strange, flat country with many canals and tall
poplar trees; and so we came to Bruges in safety, after a most prosperous
course.  There he commended me to a good friend of his, a wool merchant
travelling to Salisbury; and at first all things went well with us; but
later the winds proved contrary, and we were driven hither and thither in
great peril of our lives, but at last made the Bristol Channel, and so
came safe into port.  Thence I have come hither afoot begging my bread.”

When Hilarius had made an end, the Prior took him in his arms and blessed
him for his dear son; praising God that the lad had come back a child at
heart, but hungering, loving, open-eyed.

Next morning, being shriven, Hilarius ate the bread and drank the wine of
the “wayfaring man,” his heart merry for the joy of his home-coming.
When the Lady-Mass was ended he knelt on in her Chapel.

“Great Light of Love, all praise and thanks be thine from thy poor son,”
sang his heart; and then he prayed for his little maid.



CHAPTER IV
THE PASSING OF PRIOR STEPHEN


THE Convent welcomed Hilarius gladly, and on the Feast of St Michael he
made his profession, for the Prior deemed that he had served his
noviciate and been found faithful; and the Brethren assented eagerly, for
they were fain to keep this wondrous limner for the service of their own
Church.

Then, by the Prior’s command, Hilarius set himself to limn a great
picture for the High Altar.  It was a Crucifixion, and all his heart and
all his love were in it.  When the Brethren first saw the fair proportion
and fine colours that Hilarius brought to the work, they rejoiced in that
their Church should be glorified above other Churches of the Order; but
when the picture was near completing, and they gazed up into the wondrous
face of the Great King who looked down from the throne of His triumphant
suffering, with a world of hunger and love in His eyes for those who had
so enthroned Him, they hung their heads for shame because of the
emulation in their hearts; and lo! the Cellarer, for very love, was
careful for the needs of the elder Brethren; and the monks, for very
love, laid hold gladly of suffering, and so the Convent was blessed, and
lived together in unity.

In one of the groups very near the Cross, Hilarius set a grey-eyed girl,
a woman with a babe at the breast, and clinging to her skirts, a little
flaxen-headed maid.  None but the Prior knew the meaning of these three,
and their names, with that of a poor light-o’-love, were ever on his lips
when he offered the Holy Sacrifice.

Gentle Brother Hilarius painted and loved, and was beloved of all his
world.  The years sped, and he became in turn Almoner, Novice-master, and
Sub-Prior: and no man envied him, for he reckoned himself ever as least
of all and servant of all.

Prior Stephen attained his fourscore years, ruling the Convent wisely and
well to the very end: ay, and never ailed aught, his call coming as it
might be straight from the mouth of the Lord.

On the Feast of Blessed Stephen he went into the chapter and said as
always: “_The souls of the deceased brethren and believers rest in
peace_!” to which the Convent replied, “_Amen_.”  Then with his hands
raised to bless he cried, “_Benedicite_,” and again with loud and joyful
voice “_Domine_,” and again, “_Domine_!” as of one who answers to his
name—and so passed to his place in the Kingdom of Christ.

The Convent elected Hilarius to be Prior in his stead, which election the
Abbat of Cluny confirmed with good grace.

Time passed, and the fame of the Monastery grew because of the exceeding
beauty of the Church, for Hilarius, with those whom he taught, set fair
pictures on the walls, and blazoned the roof with the blue of heaven and
gold of the wakeful stars.  In the span over the High Altar he set
Blessed Benedict himself with the face of Prior Stephen, and round him
the angel virtues; even as one Giotto, a shepherd lad, had limned them in
the Church of the Little Brothers.

Now Prior Hilarius desired greatly to set a picture of Our Lady above the
Altar in her Chapel.  Long did he pray with ever-increasing fervour and
much fasting that this boon might be vouchsafed him for her glory and the
Convent’s greater good.  And one day—’twas her Nativity—he set his hand
to the work, for it seemed to him that she would have it so; and he was
greatly humbled that such heavenly kindness should attend so vile a
sinner.  Day by day he set apart some hours for this service; and he
limned a face so fair and radiant, with woman’s love and light of heaven,
that it was whispered in the cloister walks that the Prior had surely
been blessed by a vision, else had he never pictured the Maid-Mother in
so wondrous a fashion: and of a truth a man might well give credence to
such a story, for the joy that shone in the Prior’s eyes and might not be
hid.

Many other tales did the Brethren tell of Hilarius, but softly, for he
would hear no word of his own deeds or the favours vouchsafed him.

When he walked in the garth the pigeons circled round him crooning their
peace-note; and it was told that the kine in the meadows ceased browsing
when he passed, and needs must company with him a little way.

Once it befell that a lay-brother was afflicted with heavy sickness by
reason of the sun’s great heat; and Satan strove with him for his
undoing, so that the poor soul foamed at the mouth and roared out
blasphemy; yea, verily, and must be held with cords also, lest he do
himself or his fellows some grievous hurt.  But when the Prior laid his
hand between the man’s troubled eyes sweet sleep came upon him, and his
madness forsook him.

The poor also crowded to the Monastery gate and were fed, ay, even if the
Brethren went hungry; and if any man in all the villages round had aught
against his neighbour he would come to the Prior for a just hearing.

Nevertheless, despite these things the Convent’s peace began to be
troubled.  Men sought the Monastery for its famous name, caring but
little for religion; there were many young novices within its walls, and
the strong hand of Prior Stephen was lacking.  Hilarius was of gentler
build; he would speak ever in love, thinking no evil, whereas it is not
given to all men to understand that tongue.  So it came to pass that the
younger Brethren waxed fat and kicked, and the elder Brethren murmured.



CHAPTER V
“GABRIEL, MAKE THIS MAN TO UNDERSTAND THE VISION.”—DAN. viii. 16.


ONE day the Novice-master, Brother Adam, a most worthy man, came in sore
trouble to the Prior and would resign his office.

“Surely never before did such an ill-conditioned brood find shelter in a
monastery!” he cried.  “They grow fat, idle, insolent, quarrelsome-never
at peace among themselves; never a Pater or an Ave too many, or a task
fulfilled, save for fear of stripes.  I would that the time of
blood-letting were here that their high stomachs might be brought low.  I
am no longer young, my Father, and this burden tries me sorely.  Prithee,
let it be shifted to another and a stronger back.”

The Prior listened with many an inward _mea culpa_.  “’Tis a sad hearing,
Brother Adam, but young blood is hard of mastering; maybe this ill mood
will pass.  The lad Robert is surely ever gentle and decorous?  He hath a
most beauteous voice.”

The Novice-master threw up his hands.

“Nay, Father, nay, he hath indeed the voice of an angel, but methinks his
body is surely the habitation of Satan.  He will sing an it please him—or
when thou art by, my Father,—but, an it please him not, he is silent; ay,
even under grievous stripes.  The Precentor giveth him as negligent and
ill-conditioned; and in choir, when he looketh most like to one of God’s
Saints, he is but plotting mischief for the day.”

The Prior heard him sadly.

“And Hubert?” he said.  “Hubert methinks hath a great love of colour and
a fine hand with the brush.”

Brother Adam was almost speechless.

“Hubert!  Nay Father, forgive me, Father, but even this very Hubert but
yesterday slipped a handful of pebbles into Brother Edmund’s mess,
whereby he was like to break his teeth or take some more grievous hurt.
And indeed the peace of the Brethren is much troubled, wherefore they
complain bitterly.”

“Young blood, young blood, but not of necessity evil,” said the Prior.
Then, seeing the Novice-master’s aggrieved face, he bade him have
patience yet a little, for he himself would speak to the novices; and
with this Brother Adam must fain be content.

                                * * * * *

The next day in the Chapter the Prior spoke.

It comes to pass oftentimes that men seeing a sign are made curious by
it; and then forgetting, find the clue thereto, it may be, long after.
Even thus it happened on this day in the Chapter; and when Prior Hilarius
was gathered to his rest the Brethren remembered how they had marked and
marvelled at the strange beauty of his face, the beauty as of one who
sees the face of the Lord.

“My children,” he cried—“for my children ye are, though I see among you
many it were more fitting I should hail as father, but that the ruling of
the Lord cannot be gainsaid—my children, I am minded to think that I have
this day a message on my lips that is not mine own.

“Last night a vision came to me as I slept.  Blessed Benedict, our
Father, stood at my side, and his face was troubled.

“‘Arise, my son,’ he cried, ‘arise, for the Lord is at hand and hath need
of thee.’

“And I, deeming it was of judgment that he spake, sprang up in shame and
fear that the Master should find me sleeping.

“Then cried Blessed Benedict again:—

“‘If thou wilt serve the Lord, make haste, for He hath called thee these
many times,’ and so saying passed from my sight.

“Brethren, I went forth as one bewildered, and made haste to the Church
lest peradventure I should find Him; but the lamps burnt dim and all was
silent.  Then I turned aside and went out into the night, and it was very
dark, with no sound but the wind in the forest trees.

“My heart was a-hungered, and I sought in cloister and garth; and as I
hasted to the gate I cried aloud, even as she cried who sought Him in a
garden—‘They have taken away my Lord.’

“At the gate I stayed me, and besought the Lord for a sign; and lo, in
the darkness one came and led me by the hand away from the gate, across
the garth and up the dormitory stair, nor loosed me until I passed within
where the Brethren lay sleeping, and the chamber was bright with
exceeding radiance.

“I found myself by the pallet of my dear son Robert: his face was wet
with tears; and as he lay I saw upon his shoulder the mark of many
stripes.

“Again, one took my hand and led me from one to another of our Brethren,
and on every face lay the shadow of a great need, but in every face there
was somewhat of the Christ; and the lesson burnt in my heart.

“Then One came swiftly and laid healing hands on the boy Robert; but I
fled, for I might not see Him; and I awoke sore troubled—ay, and the
trouble is on me still.

“My Brethren, I can but tell the vision as it came to me.  Great is the
rule of Benedict, our Father, and in it stripes, grievous and many as our
sins, have their rightful place; but mayhap we forget that love, and love
alone, should strike.  Ay, and I mind me how Prior Stephen, my Father,
said that to be monk a man must learn before all things to hunger and to
love.  Love should draw the water and build the fire, till the field and
attend the sanctuary; and hunger we should cherish in our hearts, hunger
for righteousness and for the souls of our brethren, for this is the
hunger of God.

“Men come over lightly to the Lord’s work; and lo! pride and emulation,
jealousy and discontent, spring up and thrive, and the end is shame and
confusion.

“I speak as to my children; it is in my heart that the Lord is at hand:
let us see that we love while there is yet time.”

Then he turned to the novices and stretched out his hands to where they
stood amazed, and it may be ashamed—not after this manner was Brother
Adam wont to rebuke them.

“And ye, who are, as it were, the babes of our Order, give heed to your
ways, neither bring unwilling hands to this service.  Better far go
forth, yea, even to death, than mock the Lord with froward feet and a
heart that is full of vanity.  Remember the sacrifice which Cain offered
and the Lord rejected, for he gainsayed the voice of the Lord and
disobeyed His Commandment; wherefore the wrath of God fell upon him.

“I who speak now, speak in love; give ear to my words, and let fear
befriend you; for the coming of the Lord is as a thief in the night, and
lo! stripes bitter and many await that servant whom the Master finds
sleeping.”

Then the Prior, having made an end of speaking, raised his hand to bless,
and went forth in silence; and no man stirred in his place, for they knew
that the Lord had spoken and were afraid.



CHAPTER VI
THE HUNGER OF DICKON THE WOODMAN


JUNE was at an end, and men cried aloud for rain.  The hedges were white,
the fields scorched and brown; the leaves fell from the trees as at
autumn’s touch; the fruits scarce formed hung wry and twisted on the
bough; the heavens burnt pitiless, without a cloud.

Dickon, the woodman, sat by the wayside gnawing a crust and a scrap of
mouldy bacon.  There was no sound but the howl of a dog from some
neighbouring farmstead, and he sat in sullen mood, his bill-hook beside
him, brooding over his wrongs; for the world had gone contrary with him.

His wife was dead; she had died in childbed a month gone, leaving six
hungry, naked brats on his shoulders; and now a worse thing had befallen
him; his gold was gone—his gold to which he had no right, for ’twas
blood-money, the food of his children, ay, and something beside; but
Dickon loved that gold piece above all the world—above Heaven and his own
soul—and it was gone.

A neighbour had surely done it; marked the hiding-place which he had
deemed so safe, and made off with the prize; and i’ faith ’twas easy
carrying.  There was but one piece, and Dickon minded how he had changed
his petty hoard to gold scarce a month back at the fair.  Maybe it was
Thomas the charcoal burner had served him this ill turn; or William
Crookleg, the miller’s man; he was a sly, prying fellow, and there had
been ill blood between them.

He was fain to seek the Monastery that lay the other side the forest, and
crave justice of the Prior, but that the Prior might say ’twas ill-got
gain and well rid of.

Dickon rose to his feet and shambled homewards; he was ragged, ill-fed,
unkempt.  The day’s work was done, and on the village green he found men
and women, for the most part as ill-clad as himself, standing about in
groups gossiping.  The innkeeper lounged at the ale-house door, thin and
peaked as his fellows; there was no good living for any man in those
parts, by reason of the over-lord who sore oppressed them.

A little man, keen-eyed and restless, holding a lean and sorry horse by
the bridle, was talking eagerly.

“Nay, ’tis true eno’, and three crows saw I this very day on the
churchyard wall—it bodes ill to some of us.”

“Well, well,” said the innkeeper, “have it thine own way.  Methinks the
ill hath outrun the omen, for there will be naught for man or beast
shortly—but fine pickings for thy three crows.”

The little man scowled at him: Dickon came up.

“What’s to do?” he said curtly.

“Nay,” said mine host, “Robin will have it that some further evil is upon
us—tho’ methinks we have got our fill and to spare with this drought—ay,
and ’twas at thy house, Dickon, he saw the corpse-light.”

“Better a corpse-light than six open mouths, and naught to fill them,”
said Dickon surlily.  “Whither away, Robin?  ’Tis not far this beast will
travel.”

“Right thou art, but my master will turn an honest penny with the
carcass,” answered the little man; “give me my reckoning, friend John.  I
must needs haste if I would see the Forester’s ere nightfall.”

He pulled out a few small coins and a gold piece.  When Dickon saw it his
eyes gleamed.  Robin paid the reckoning and put the piece in his cheek.

“Hard-earned money—’tis blood out of a stone to draw wages from my
master.  Better it should light in my belly than in a rogue’s pocket.
’Tis as well for me that John o’ th’ Swift-foot swings at the
cross-roads.  Godden, my masters!”  And leading his weary beast, he took
the road that skirted the forest.

The moon was at full, and he had yet a good stretch of lonely way before
him, when the horse stumbled and fell and would not rise.

“A murrain on the beast!” muttered Robin angrily, tugging in vain at the
creature on whom death had taken pity.  “I must e’en leave him by the
wayside and tell Richard what hath befallen.”

He stooped to loose the halter, and as he bent to his task a man slipped
from the shadow of the hedge into the quiet moonlight.  There was a thud,
a dull cry, and Robin fell prone across the horse’s neck—a pace beyond
him in the moonlight shone the gleam of gold.

Next day Dickon’s child died, ay, and the other five followed with scant
time between the buryings.  Another had fathered them and filled the
gaping mouths; but men shuddered at his care, for it was the Black Death
that they had deemed far from them.

Pale and woebegone they clustered on the green.  News had come of
Robin—he was dead when they found him—but no man gave heed.  Death was in
the air, death held them safe in walls they might not scale.  The heavens
were brass, food failed for man and beast, God and man alike had forsaken
them.  The forest lay one side, the river, now but a shallow sluggish
stream, lay the other; ’twas a cleft stick and the springe tightened.

No evil had as yet befallen Dickon.  He stood with the rest and murmured,
cursing.  All at once he made for the ale-house.

“Fools that we are to stand like helpless brats when there is liquor
enough and to spare in yon cellars.  He who is minded to go dry throat to
Heaven had best make haste; for me I will e’en swill a bucket to the
devil’s health, and so to hell.”

Half-a-dozen men followed him, pushing aside mine host who strove to bar
the door.  Some of the women fell on their knees and clamoured in half
delirious prayer; the rest slunk dismayed to their pestilent homes.



CHAPTER VII
THE VISION OF THE EVENING AND THE MORNING


MEANWHILE, news came to the Monastery of the ill case of the village, for
it lay scarce a league away across the forest; but the pine-trees stood
as guardian angels in between.

The Prior summoned the whole Convent, according to the ruling of Blessed
Benedict when the matter is a grave one, and told the tidings.

Then he went on to give reason for their assembling.

“My Brethren, it is in my heart that we dare not leave these poor,
stricken sheep to die alone without shepherding; moreover, in their fear
and desolation, they may flee to other villages, and so the terror and
pest spread ever further.  And I deem that, inasmuch as Charity is
greater than Faith or Hope, so it is greater than obedience also.
Wherefore I purpose to set aside the Rule of our Order in the letter that
I may hold to it in the spirit, and go forth to serve these perishing
brethren; and I will take with me whosoever hears the call of God in this
visitation.”

When he had made an end, there was silence in the Chapter.  Break
cloister, the Prior himself urging them thereto?  The Convent might
scarce credit its ears.

Prior Hilarius watched his children with a tender smile on his white
face, and a prayer on his lips that love might have its triumph.

Five monks stood up, among them the Sub-Prior, and seven novices sprang
also to their feet.

“Nay, Brother Walter,” said Hilarius, turning to the Sub-Prior, “this
flock must have its shepherd also; thy place is here.  But I will take
with me Brother Simon and Brother Leo, who will doubtless suffice at
first for the ministry, and—” smiling at the novices—“all these dear lads
to tend the sick and bury the dead.”

The Sub-Prior ventured on a remonstrance.

“Good Father, it is not fitting that thou should’st go on such an errand;
send me in thy stead, for my life is a small thing as compared with
thine.  Moreover these novices, ’tis but the other day the Master gave
them as lazy and ill-conditioned, and—”

The Prior held up his hand.

“Dear Brother, I thank thee for thy love and care for me; but my call has
come.  As for these—” he stretched out his hand towards the waiting
novices—“maybe they are in the wrong school, and the Lord hath even
opened the door that they may serve Him, perchance die for Him,
elsewhere.  And shall I count myself wiser than Prior Stephen, who set me
without the gate to learn my lesson?  Let us go in peace, my children,
for we are about the Lord’s business.”

                                * * * * *

Very early next day, having eaten of Heavenly manna, the little band
embraced their brethren and set out, laden with food and wine and herbs
from the farmery; and the Prior appointed a place to which the Convent
should send daily all things needed.

The shade of the forest was very welcome in the hot, breathless sunshine,
and the scent of the pine-needles, odorous, pungent, rose at each
footfall from the silent path.  The Brethren chanted the Gradual Psalms
as they paced two and two through the sun-lit aisles, full of the Prior’s
memories; and he looked up again to see Our Lady’s robe across the
tree-tops.  Then all at once the Psalm broke, and Brother Simon, who was
leading, stayed suddenly.

Under a bush beside the track lay a man, naked save for filthy rags; his
hair and beard matted with moss and leaves; his eyes sunk, his lips drawn
apart in a ghastly grin.  Hilarius made haste to kneel beside him, and
lo! sudden remembrance lighted the fast-glazing eyes, but his own
answered not.

“My son, my son,” said the Prior, and his voice was very pitiful, “thou
art indeed in evil case; let me shrive thee ere it be too late.”

He motioned the others to stand back, and raising the heavy head upon his
shoulder, bent close to catch the whisper of the parched lips.

At first no sound came, and then a hoarse word reached him.

“The Convent’s hens!”

The Prior stared amazed; then once more the laboured voice—

“Hast forgot thy theft, and the dancer?”

Hilarius needed no further word; in a moment the years were wiped away.

“Lad, lad, to find thee again, and in such sorry plight!  But see, stay
not thy shriving, for the time is short, and the Lord ever ready to
pardon.”

The man strove in vain to speak.  At last he said quite clearly: “I
hunger,” and so saying died.

The Prior was greatly moved, and for a while he knelt in prayer, while
the Brethren, amazed, waited his pleasure.  Then he rose, and lo! before
him lay the open glade where his schooling had begun, and he had seen a
flower incarnate dance in the wind.

He bade them lift the dead, and lay him in the hollow of the glade under
fallen branches until they could return and give him burial.  Then, as
they went on their way, he told the tale of his little maid; and when the
telling was ended, the village they had come to succour was in sight, and
lo! they saw it through a mist.



CHAPTER VIII
“BEHOLD THE FIELDS ARE WHITE”


THE Prior’s heart was ready, and it seemed to him as he passed up the
village and saw the huddled, helpless people, that his little maid led
him by the hand.

Brother Simon, Brother Leo, and the novices turned aside to speak comfort
and carry succour to the sick and fearful, and to bury the dead; for
three unshriven souls had passed to judgment and mercy.  Hilarius made
straight for the ale-house.

As he crossed the green, the door opened and Dickon stumbled blindly down
the steps.  At sight of a monk he cried out, and suddenly sobered,
dropped on his knees, while the topers and roysterers staring from the
open doorway fell into silence.

Hilarius pushed back his cowl and stood bareheaded in the scorching sun
of that windless day; it came to his mind that he was very weary.

“Hear, O my children, the Lord hath sent me to succour you, lest ye go
down quick into the pit.  Return, every one of you, for the arms of His
love are still stretched wide upon the Rood, and the very hairs of your
head are numbered.  Repent ye, therefore, and confess each one of you his
sins, that I may prepare him for the work of the Lord; and take comfort
also, for they that are with us are mighty.”

One by one the men, sobered by the shock of great surprise, confessed and
were shriven under the summer sun: only the man Dickon was not among
them.  Then the Prior bade them get to work as he should direct; and he
set a watch that no man should flee the village; and all obeyed him.

Early and late the Prior toiled with the Brethren and his band of
workers, nursing the sick, burying the dead, and destroying the pestilent
dwellings.

Brother Leo was the first to whom the call came: he answered it like a
soldier at his post.

As the Prior rose from the pallet of his dead son, one bade him come
quickly, for a dying man had need of him.  It was Dickon.

The Prior, bearing with him the Body of the Lord, made haste to the hovel
where he lay, and shrived him though he scarce could hear his muttered
words; but lo! when he would place the Host he could not, for a gold
piece lay on the man’s tongue.  The Prior drew back dismayed, and behold,
the Lord’s hand struck swiftly, and Dickon died with a barren shriving—on
whom may Christ take pity!

Next day great grey clouds curtained the arid, staring sky; and at even
came the rain.  All through the night it fell; and one of the novices,
who lay a-dying in the Prioir’s arms, heard it as he passed, and fell
back, joy on his lips and a radiant smile on his young face.

“‘_Esurientes implevit bonis_,’” said the Prior, as he laid him down,
blessing God.

A second novice died, then a third, and yet another; but there was no
need to call further help from the Monastery, for the Plague was stayed.
Never had cloistered monks spent such a strange season; rarely such a
blessed one.

The Feast of the Transfiguration was nigh at hand, and the Prior was
minded to return on that day to the waiting, anxious Convent, for his
work was done.

Great was the joy and preparation at the Monastery when the tidings
reached them; joy too for those who lay not in the shelter of the
cloister garth, but, as it were, on the battlefield where they had given
their lives for their brethren.

The holy day dawned without a cloud.  A strong west wind bowed the pines
in the forest, and they worshipped and sang for joy, because of the face
of the Lord.  The sun burnt bright in the great blue dome, and earth
shone with pale reflection of his glory.

The monks paced the cloister walks, and waited and watched to catch the
signal from the lay-brother posted without.  At last the word came that
voices were heard in the distance; and monks and novices hastened two and
two to the gate.  On the wind was borne the sound of a chant.

“’Tis a dirge for those that are gone,” said Brother Anselm; and crossing
themselves, the Brothers chanted out the sonorous response:

                       “_Et lux perpetua luceat eis_.”

As they reached the open gate, the little band they waited for came
slowly down the forest pathway.

Four Brothers, only four; and lo! on their shoulders they bore a rude
bier of pine-branches.

This was the gathering of Brother Hilarius.  Sweet-scented boughs for his
last bed; Mary’s lilies aglow for tapers tall; the censer of the forest
swung by sun and wind; and the glory of the face of the Lord.

He had called his children to him in the late night-watches, and having
kissed and blessed them, he bade them turn him to the east, for his time
had come; and they obeyed in sore grief and perplexed.  Prior Hilarius
lay and watched for the light, and as dawn parted night’s veil with the
long foregleam of the coming day, he shut his eyes like a tired child and
went home.

It was his heart, Brother Simon thought; but the Sub-Prior cried through
his tears:—

“Nay, nay, it was God a-hungered for His dear son.”

They bore the Prior into the white-clad Church, and laid him on his
forest-bed under the great Christ; and the novices, seeing the tender
smile on the beautiful face, whispered one to another, “The Prior hath
found his little maid.”  And the Convent made Hilarius a wondrous fair
tomb of alabaster inlaid with gold, and carved him lying thereon with
Mary’s lilies across his breast.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GATHERING OF BROTHER HILARIUS***


******* This file should be named 789-0.txt or 789-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/7/8/789


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

