The Project Gutenberg EBook of Asteroid of Fear, by Raymond Zinke Gallun

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Asteroid of Fear

Author: Raymond Zinke Gallun

Release Date: June 12, 2010 [EBook #32780]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTEROID OF FEAR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            ASTEROID of FEAR

                          By RAYMOND Z. GALLUN

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Planet Stories March
1951. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _All space was electrified as that harsh challenge rang
out ... but John Endlich hesitated. For he saw beyond his own murder--saw
the horror and destruction his death would unleash--and knew he dared
not fight back!_]

The space ship landed briefly, and John Endlich lifted the huge
Asteroids Homesteaders Office box, which contained everything from a
prefabricated house to toothbrushes for his family, down from the
hold-port without help or visible effort.

In the tiny gravity of the asteroid, Vesta, doing this was no trouble at
all. But beyond this point the situation was--bitter.

His two kids, Bubs, seven, and Evelyn, nine--clad in space-suits that
were slightly oversize to allow for the growth of young bodies--were
both bawling. He could hear them through his oxygen-helmet radiophones.

Around him, under the airless sky of space, stretched desolation that
he'd of course known about beforehand--but which now had assumed that
special and terrible starkness of reality.

At his elbow, his wife, Rose, her heart-shaped face and grey eyes framed
by the wide face-window of her armor, was trying desperately to choke
back tears, and be brave.

"Remember--we've _got_ to make good here, Johnny," she was saying.
"Remember what the Homesteaders Office people told us--that with modern
equipment and the right frame of mind, life can be nice out here. It's
worked on other asteroids. What if we are the first farmers to come to
Vesta?... Don't listen to those crazy miners! They're just kidding us!
Don't listen to them! And don't, for gosh sakes, get sore...."

Rose's words were now like dim echoes of his conscience, and of his
recent grim determination to master his hot temper, his sensitiveness,
his wanderlust, and his penchant for poker and the social
glass--qualities of an otherwise agreeable and industrious nature, that,
on Earth, had always been his undoing. Recently, back in Illinois, he
had even spent six months in jail for all but inflicting murder with his
bare fists on a bullying neighbor whom he had caught whipping a horse.
Sure--but during those six months his farm, the fifth he'd tried to run
in scattered parts of North America, had gone to weeds in spite of
Rose's valiant efforts to take care of it alone....

Oh, yes--the lessons of all that past personal history should be strong
in his mind. But now will power and Rose's frightened tones of wisdom
both seemed to fade away in his brain, as jeering words from another
source continued to drive jagged splinters into the weakest portion of
his soul:

"Hi, you hydroponic pun'kin-head!... How yuh like your new claim?...
Nice, ain't it? How about some fresh turnips?... Good luck, yuh
greenhorn.... Hiyuh, papa! Tied to baby's diaper suspenders!... Let the
poor dope alone, guys.... Snooty.... Won't take our likker, hunh? Won't
take our money.... Wifey's boy! Let's make him sociable....
Haw-Haw-haw.... Hydroponic pun'kin-head!..."

It was a medley of coarse voices and laughter, matching the row of a
dozen coarse faces and grins that lined the view-ports of the ship.
These men were asteroid miners, space-hardened and space-twisted. They'd
been back to Earth for a while, to raise hell and freshen up, and spend
the money in their then-bulging pockets. Coming out again from Earth,
across the orbit of Mars to the asteroid belt, they had had the Endlichs
as fellow passengers.

John Endlich had battled valiantly with his feebler side, and with his
social inclinations, all through that long, dreary voyage, to keep clear
of the inevitable griefs that were sure to come to a chap like himself
from involvement with such characters. In the main, it had been a rather
tattered victory. But now, at the final moment of bleak anticlimax, they
took their revenge in guffaws and ridicule, hurling the noise at him
through the radiophones of the space-suit helmets that they held in
their laps--space-suits being always kept handy beneath the
traveler-seats of every interplanetary vessel.

"... Haw-haw-haw! Drop over to our camp sometime for a little drink, and
a little game, eh, pantywaist? Tain't far. Sure--just drop in on us when
the pressure of domesticity in this beootiful country gets you down....
When the turnips get you down! Haw-haw-haw! Bring the wife along....
She's kinda pretty. Ought to have a man-size fella.... Just ask for
me--Alf Neely! Haw-haw-haw!"

Yeah, Alf Neely was the loudest and the ugliest of John Endlich's
baiters. He had gigantic arms and shoulders, small squinty eyes, and a
pendulous nose. "Haw-haw-haw!..."

And the others, yelling and hooting, made it a pack: "Man--don't he wish
he was back in Podunk!... What!--no tomatas, Dutch?... What did they
tell yuh back at the Homestead office in Chicago?--that we were in
de-e-esperate need of fresh vegetables out here? Well, where are they,
papa?... Haw-haw-haw!..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Under the barrage John Endlich's last shreds of common-sense were all
but blotted out by the red murk of fury. He was small and broad--a
stolid-looking thirty-two years old. But now his round and usually
placid face was as red as a fiery moon, and his underlip curled in a
snarl. He might have taken the savage ribbing more calmly. But there was
too much grim fact behind what these asteroid miners said. Besides, out
here he had thought that he would have a better chance to lick the
weaknesses in himself--because he'd _have_ to work to keep his family
alive; because he'd been told that there'd be no one around to distract
him from duty. Yah! The irony of that, now, was maddening.

For the moment John Endlich was speechless and strangled--but like an
ignited firecracker. Uhunh--ready to explode. His hard body hunched, as
if ready to spring. And the baiting waxed louder. It was like the
yammering of crows, or the roar of a wild surf in his ears. Then came
the last straw. The kids had kept on bawling--more and more violently.
But now they got down to verbal explanations of what they thought was
the matter:

"Wa-aa-aa-a-ahh-h! Papa--we wanna-go-o-o--hom-m-mm-e!..."

The timing could not have been better--or worse. The shrieks and howls
of mirth from the miners, a moment ago, were as nothing to what they
were now.

"Ho-ho-ho! Tell it to Daddy, kids!... Ho-ho-ho! That was a mouthful....
Ho-ho-ho-ho! Wow!..."

There is a point at which an extremity of masculine embarrassment can
lead to but one thing--mayhem. Whether the latter is to be inflicted on
the attacked or the attacker remains the only question mark.

"I'll get you, Alf Neely!" Endlich snarled. "Right now! And I'll get all
the damned, hell-bitten rest of you guys!"

Endlich was hardly lacking in vigor, himself. Like a squat but
streamlined fighting rooster, rendered a hundred times more agile by the
puny gravity, he would have reached the hold-port threshold in a single
lithe skip--had not Rose, despairing, grabbed him around the middle to
restrain him. Together they slid several yards across the dried-out
surface of the asteroid.

"Don't, Johnny--please don't!" she wailed.

Her begging could not have stopped him. Nor could her physical
interference--for more than an instant. Nor could his conscience, nor
his recent determination to keep out of trouble. Not the certainty of
being torn limb from limb, and not hell, itself, could have held him
back, anymore, then.

Yet he was brought to a halt. It certainly wasn't cowardice that
accomplished this. No.

Suddenly there was no laughter among the miners. But in a body they
arose from their traveler-seats aboard the ship. Suddenly there was no
more humor in their faces beyond the view-ports. They were itching to be
assaulted. The glitter in Alf Neely's small eyes was about as reassuring
as the glitter in the eyes of a slightly prankish gorilla.

"We're waitin' for yuh, Mr. Civilization," he rumbled softly.

       *       *       *       *       *

After that, all space was still--electrified. The icy stars gleamed in
the black sky. The shrunken sun looked on. And John Endlich saw beyond
his own murder. To the thought of his kids--and his wife--left alone out
here, hundreds of millions of miles from Earth, and real law and
order--with these lugs. These guys who had been starved emotionally, and
warped inside by raw space. Coldness crawled into John Endlich's guts,
and seemed to twist steel hooks there, making him sick. The silence of a
vacuum, and of unthinkable distances, and of ghostly remains which must
be left on this fragment of a world that had blown up, maybe fifty
million or more years ago, added its weight to John Endlich's feelings.

And for his family, he was scared. What hell could not have
accomplished, became fact. His almost suicidal impulse to inflict
violence on his tormenters was strangled, bottled-up--brutally
repressed, and left to impose the pangs of neurosis on his tormented
soul. Narrowing domesticity had won a battle.

Except, of course, that what he had already said to Alf Neely and
Friends was sufficient to start the Juggernaut that they represented,
rolling. As he picked himself and Rose up from the ground, he saw that
the miners were grimly donning their space-suits, in preparation to
their coming out of the ship to lay him low.

"Oh--tired, hunh, Pun'kin-head?" Alf Neely growled. "It don't matter,
Dutch. We'll finish you off without you liftin' a finger!"

In John Endlich the rage of intolerable insults still seethed. But there
was no question, now, of outcome between it and the brassy taste of
danger on his tongue. He knew that even knuckling down, and changing
from man to worm to take back his fighting words, couldn't do any good.
He felt like a martyr, left with his family in a Roman arena, while the
lions approached. His butchery was as good as over....

Reprieve came presumably by way of the good-sense of the pilot of the
space ship. The hold-port was closed abruptly by a mechanism that could
be operated only from the main control-board. The rocket jets of the
craft emitted a single weak burst of flame. Like a boulder grown agile
and flighty, the ship leaped from the landscape, and arced outward
toward the stars, to curve around the asteroid and disappear behind the
scene's jagged brim. The craft had gone to make its next and final
stop--among the air-domes of the huge mining camp on the other side of
Vesta--the side of torn rocks and rich radioactive ores.

But before the ship had vanished from sight, John Endlich heard Alf
Neely's grim promise in his helmet radiophones: "We'll be back tonight,
Greenhorn. Lots of times we work night-shift--when it's daytime on this
side of Vesta. We'll be free. Stick around. I'll rub what's left of you
in the dust of your claim!"

Endlich was alone, then, with the fright in his wife's eyes, the
squalling of his children, and his own abysmal disgust and worry.

For once he ceased to be a gentle parent. "Bubs! Evelyn!" he snapped.
"Shud-d-d--up-p-p!..."

The startled silence which ensued was his first personal victory on
Vesta. But the silence, itself, was an insidious enemy. It made his ears
ring. It made even his audible pulsebeats seemed to ache. It bored into
his nerves like a drill. When, after a moment, Rose spoke quaveringly,
he was almost grateful:

"What do we do, Johnny? We've still got to do what we're supposed to do,
don't we?"

Whereupon John Endlich allowed himself the luxury and the slight relief
of a torrent of silent cussing inside his head. Damn the obvious
questions of women! Damn the miners. Damn the A.H.O.--the Asteroids
Homesteaders Office--and their corny slogans and posters, meant to hook
suckers like himself! Damn his own dumb hide! Damn the mighty urge to
get drunk! Damn all the bitter circumstances that made doing so
impossible. Damn! Damn! Damn!

Finished with this orgy, he said meekly: "I guess so, Hon."

       *       *       *       *       *

All members of the Endlich family had been looking around them at the
weird Vestal landscape. Through John Endlich's mind again there flashed
a picture of what this asteroid was like. At the Asteroids Homesteaders'
School in Chicago, where his dependents and he had been given several
weeks of orientation instruction, suitable to their separate needs, he
had been shown diagrams and photographs of Vesta. Later, he had of
course seen it from space.

It was not round, like a major planet or most moons. Rather, it was like
a bomb-fragment; or even more like a shard of a gigantic broken vase. It
was several hundred miles long, and half as thick. One side of it--this
side--was curved; for it had been a segment of the surface of the
shattered planet from which all of the asteroids had come. The other
side was jagged and broken, for it had been torn from the mesoderm of
that tortured mother world.

From the desolation of his own thoughts, in which the ogre-form of Alf
Neely lurked with its pendent promise of catastrophe soon to come, and
from his own view of other desolation all around him, John Endlich was
suddenly distracted by the comments of his kids. All at once, conforming
to the changeable weather of children's natures regardless of
circumstance, their mood had once more turned bright and adventurous.

"Look, Pop," Bubs chirped, his round red face beaming now from his
helmet face-window, in spite of his undried tears. "This land all around
here was fields once! You can even see the rows of some kind of stubble!
Like corn-stubble! And over there's a--a--almost like a fence! An' up
there is hills with trees on 'em--some of 'em not even knocked over. But
everything is all dried-out and black and grey and dead! Gosh!"

"We can see all that, Dopey!" Evelyn, who was older, snapped at Bubs.
"We know that something like people lived on a regular planet here,
awful long ago. Why don't you look over the other way? There's the
house--and maybe the barn and the sheds and the old garden!"

Bubs turned around. His eyes got very big. "Oh! O-ooh-h-h!" he gasped in
wonder. "Pop! Mom! Look! Don't you see?..."

"Yeah, we see, Bubs," John Endlich answered.

For a long moment he'd been staring at those blocklike structures.
One--maybe the house--was of grey stone. It had odd, triangular windows,
which may once have been glazed. Some of the others were of a blackened
material--perhaps cellulose. Wood, that is. All of the buildings were
pushed askew, and partly crumpled from top to bottom, like great
cardboard cartons that had been half crushed.

Endlich's imagination seemed forced to follow a groove, trying to
picture that last terrible moment, fifty-million years ago. Had the
blast been caused by natural atomic forces at the heart of the planet,
as one theory claimed? Or had a great bomb, as large as an oversized
meteor, come self-propelled from space, to bury itself deep in that
ancient world? A world as big as Mars, its possible enemy--whose weird
inhabitants had been wiped out, in a less spectacular way, perhaps in
the same conflict?

Endlich's mind grabbed at that brief instant of explosion. The awful
jolt, which must have ended all consciousness, and all capacity for eyes
to see what followed. Perhaps there was a short and terrible passing of
flame. But in swift seconds, great chunks of the planet's crust must
have been hurled outward. In a moment the flame must have died,
dissipated with the suddenly vanishing atmosphere, into the cold vacuum
of the void. Almost instantly, the sky, which had been deep blue before,
must have turned to its present black, with the voidal stars blazing.
There had been no air left to sustain combustion, so buildings and trees
had not continued to burn, if there had been time at all to ignite them.
And, with the same swiftness, all remaining artifacts and surface
features of this chip of a world's crust that was Vesta, had been
plunged into the dual preservatives of the interplanetary
regions--deep-freeze and all but absolute dryness. Yes--the motion of
the few scattered molecules in space was very fast--indicating a high
temperature. But without substance to be hot, there can be no heat. And
so few molecules were there in the void, that while the concept of a
"hot" space remained true, it became tangled at once with the fact that
a _practically_ complete vacuum can have _practically_ no temperature.
Which meant--again in practice--all but absolute zero.

John Endlich knew. He'd heard the lectures at the Homesteaders' School.
Here was a ghost-land, hundreds of square miles in extent--a region that
had been shifted in a few seconds, from the full prime of life and
motion, to moveless and timeless silence. It was like the mummy of a
man. In its presence there was a chill, a revulsion, and yet a
fascination.

       *       *       *       *       *

The kids continued to jabber--more excitedly now than before. "Pop!
Mom!" Bubs urged. "Let's go look inside them buildings! Maybe the
_things_ are still there! The people, I mean. All black and dried up,
like the one in the showcase at school; four tentacles they had instead
of arms and legs, the teacher said!"

"Sure! Let's go!" Evelyn joined in. "I'm not scared to!"

Yeah, kids' tastes could be pretty gruesome. When you thought most that
you had to shelter them from horror, they were less bothered by it than
you were. John Endlich's lips made a sour line.

"Stay here, the pair of you!" Rose ordered.

"Aw--Mom--" Evelyn began to protest.

"You heard me the first time," their mother answered.

John Endlich moved to the great box, which had come with them from
Earth. The nervous tension that tore at him--unpleasant and chilling,
driving him toward straining effort--was more than the result of the
shameful and embarrassing memory of his very recent trouble with Alf
Neely and Companions, and the certainty of more trouble to come from
that source. For there was another and even worse enemy. Endlich knew
what it was--

The awful silence.

He still looked shamefaced and furious; but now he felt a gentler
sharing of circumstances. "We'll let the snooping go till later, kids,"
he growled. "Right now we gotta do what we gotta do--"

The youngsters seemed to join up with his mood. As he tore the pinchbar,
which had been conveniently attached to the side of the box, free of its
staples, and proceeded to break out supplies, their whimsical musings
fell close to what he was thinking.

"Vesta," Evelyn said. "They told us at school--remember? Vesta was the
old Roman goddess of hearth and home. Funny--hunh--Dad?"

Bubs' fancy was vivid, too. "Look, Pop!" he said again, pointing to a
ribbon of what might be concrete, cracked and crumpled as by a terrific
quake, curving away toward the hills, and the broken mountains beyond.
"That was a road! Can't you almost hear some kinda cars and trucks goin'
by?"

John Endlich's wife, helping him open the great box, also had things to
say, in spite of the worry showing in her face. She touched the
dessicated soil with a gauntleted hand. "Johnny," she remarked
wonderingly. "You can see the splash-marks of the last rain that ever
fell here--"

"Yeah," Endlich growled without any further comment. Inside himself, he
was fighting the battle of lost things. The blue sky. The shifting
beauty of clouds in sunshine. The warm whisper of wind in trees. The
rattle of traffic. The babble of water. The buzz of insects. The smell
of flowers. The sight of grass waving.... In short, all the evidences of
life.

"A lot of things that was here once, we'll bring back, won't we, Pop?"
Bubs questioned with astonishing maturity.

"Hope so," John Endlich answered, keeping his doubts hidden behind
gruffness. Maybe it was a grim joke that here and now every force in
himself was concentrated on substantial objectives--to the exclusion of
his defects. The drive in him was to end the maddening silence, and to
rub out the mood of harsh barrenness, and his own aching homesickness,
by struggling to bring back a little beauty of scenery, and a little of
living motion. It was a civilized urge, a home-building urge, maybe a
narrow urge. But how could anybody stand being here very long, unless
such things were done? If they ever could be. Maybe, willfully, he had
led himself into a grimmer trap than it had even seemed to be--or than
he had ever wanted....

       *       *       *       *       *

Inside his space suit, he had begun to sweat furiously. And it was more
because of the tension of his nerves than because of the vigor with
which he plied his pinchbar, doing the first task which had to be done.
Steel ribbons were snapped, nails were yanked silently from the great
box, boards were jerked loose.

In another minute John Endlich and his wife were setting up an airtight
tent, which, when the time came, could be inflated from compressed-air
bottles. They worked somewhat awkwardly, for their instruction period
had been brief, and they were green; but the job was speedily finished.
The first requirement--shelter--was assured.

Digging again into the vast and varied contents of the box, John Endlich
found some things he had not expected--a fine rifle, a pistol and
ammunition. At which moment an ironic imp seemed to sit on his shoulder,
and laugh derisively. Umhm-m--the Asteroids Homesteaders Office had
filled these boxes according to a precise survey of the needs of a
peaceful settler on Vesta.

It was like Bubs, with the inquisitiveness of a seven-year-old, to ask:
"What did they think we needed guns for, when they knew there was no
rabbits to shoot at?"

"I guess they kind of suspected there'd be guys like Alf Neely, son,"
John Endlich answered dryly. "Even if they didn't tell us about it."

The next task prescribed by the Homesteaders' School was to secure a
supply of air and water in quantity. Again, following the instructions
they had received, the Endlichs uncrated and set up an atom-driven
drill. In an hour it had bored to a depth of five-hundred feet. Hauling
up the drill, Endlich lowered an electric heating unit on a cable from
an atomic power-cell, and then capped the casing pipe.

Yes, strangely enough there was still sufficient water beneath the
surface of Vesta. Its parent planet, like the Earth, had had water in
its crust, that could be tapped by means of wells. And so suddenly had
Vesta been chilled in the cold of space at the time of the parent body's
explosion, that this water had not had a chance to dissipate itself as
vapor into the void, but had been frozen solid. The drying soil above it
had formed a tough shell, which had protected the ice beneath from
disappearance through sublimation...

Drill down to it, melt it with heat, and it was water again, ready to be
pumped and put to use.

And water, by electrolysis, was also an easy source of oxygen to
breathe.... The soil, once thawed over a few acres, would also yield
considerable nitrogen and carbon dioxide--the makings of many cubic
meters of atmosphere. The A.H.O. survey expeditions, here on Vesta and
on other similar asteroids which were crustal chips of the original
planet, had done their work well, pathfinding a means of survival here.

When John Endlich pumped the first turbid liquid, which immediately
froze again in the surface cold, he might, under other, better
circumstances, have felt like cheering. His well was a success. But his
tense mind was racing far ahead to all the endless tasks that were yet
to be done, to make any sense at all out of his claim. Besides, the
short day--eighteen hours long instead of twenty-four, and already far
advanced at the time of his tumultuous landing--was drawing to a close.

"It'll be dark here mighty quick, Johnny," Rose said. She was looking
scared, again.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Endlich considered setting up floodlights, and working on through
the hours of darkness. But such lights would be a dangerous beacon for
prowlers; and when you were inside their area of illumination, it was
difficult to see into the gloom beyond.

Still, one did not know if the mask of darkness did not afford a greater
invitation to those with evil intent. For a long moment, Endlich was in
an agony of indecision. Then he said:

"We'll knock off from work now--get in the tent, eat supper, maybe
sleep..."

But he was remembering Neely's promise to return tonight.

In another minute the small but dazzling sun had disappeared behind the
broken mountains, as Vesta, unspherical and malformed, tumbled rather
than rotated on its center of gravity. And several hours later, amid
heavy cooking odors inside the now inflated plastic bubble that was the
tent, Endlich was sprawled on his stomach, unable, through well-founded
worry, even to remove his space suit or to allow his family to do so,
though there was breathable air around them. They lay with their helmet
face-windows open. Rose and Evelyn breathed evenly in peaceful sleep.

Bubs, trying to be very much a man, battled slumber and yawns, and kept
his dad company with scraps of conversation. "Let 'em come, Pop," he
said cheerfully. "Hope they do. We'll shoot 'em all. Won't we, pop? You
got the rifle and the pistol ready, Pop...."

Yes, John Endlich had his guns ready beside him, all right--for what it
was worth. He wished wryly that things could be as simple as his
hero-worshipping son seemed to think. Thank the Lord that Bubs was so
trusting, for his own peace of mind--the prankish and savage nature of
certain kinds of men, with liquor in their bellies, being what it was.
For John Endlich, having been, on occasion, mildly kindred to such men,
was well able to understand that nature. And understanding, now, chilled
his blood.

Peering from the small plastic windows of the tent, he kept watching for
hulking black shapes to silhouette themselves against the stars. And he
listened on his helmet phones, for scraps of telltale conversation,
exchanged by short-range radio by men in space armor. Once, he thought
he heard a grunt, or a malicious chuckle. But it may have been just
vagrant static.

Otherwise, from all around, the stillness of the vacuum was absolute. It
was unnerving. On this airless piece of a planet, an enemy could sneak
up on you, almost without stealth.

Against that maddening silence, however, Bubs presently had a helpful
and unprompted suggestion: "Hey, Pop!" he whispered hoarsely. "Put the
side of your helmet against the tent-floor, and listen!"

John Endlich obeyed his kid. In a second cold sweat began to break out
on his body, as intermittent thudding noises reached his ear. In the
absence of an atmosphere, sounds could still be transmitted through the
solid substance of the asteroid.

It took Endlich a moment to realize that the noises came, not from
nearby, but from far away, on the other side of Vesta. The thudding was
vibrated straight through many miles of solid rock.

"It's nothing, Bubs," he growled. "Nothing but the blasting in the
mines."

Bubs said "Oh," as if disappointed. Not long thereafter he was asleep,
leaving his harrassed sire to endure the vigil alone. Endlich dared not
doze off, to rest a little, even for a moment. He could only wait. If an
evil visitation came--as he had been all but sure it must--that would be
bad, indeed. If it didn't come--well--that still meant a sleepless
night, and the postponement of the inevitable. He couldn't win.

Thus the hours slipped away, until the luminous dial of the clock in the
tent--it had been synchronized to Vestal time--told him that dawn was
near. That was when, through the ground, he heard the faint scraping. A
rustle. It might have been made by heavy space-boots. It came, and then
it stopped. It came again, and stopped once more. As if skulking forms
paused to find their way.

Out where the ancient and ghostly buildings were, he saw a star wink out
briefly, as if a shape blocked the path of its light. Then it burned
peacefully again. John Endlich's hackles rose. His fists tightened on
both his rifle and pistol.

He fixed his gaze on the great box, looming blackly, the box that
contained the means of survival for his family and himself, as if he
foresaw the future, a moment away. For suddenly, huge as it was, the box
rocked, and began to move off, as if it had sprouted legs and come
alive.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Endlich scrambled to action. He slammed and sealed the face-windows
of the helmets of the members of his family, to protect them from
suffocation. He did the same for himself, and then unzipped the
tent-flap. He darted out with the outrushing air.

This was a moment with murder poised in every tattered fragment of it.
John Endlich knew. Murder was engrained in his own taut-drawn nerves,
that raged to destroy the trespassers whose pranks had passed the level
of practical humor, and become, by the tampering with vital necessities,
an attack on life itself. But there was a more immediate menace in these
space-twisted roughnecks.... Strike back at them, even in self-defense,
and have it proven!

He had not the faintest doubt who they were--even though he could not
see their faces in the blackness. Maybe he should lay low--let them have
their way.... But how could he--even apart from his raging temper, and
his honor as a man--when they were making off with his family's and his
own means of survival?

He had to throw Rose and the kids into the balance--risking them to the
danger that he knew lay beyond his own possible ignoble demise. He did
just that when he raised his pistol, struggling against the awful
impulse of the rage in him--lifted it high enough so that the explosive
bullets that spewed from it would be sure to pass over the heads of the
dark silhouettes that were moving about.

"Damn you, Neely!" Endlich yelled into his helmet mike, his finger
tightening on the trigger. "Drop that stuff!"

At that moment the sun's rim appeared at the landscape's jagged edge,
and on this side of airless Vesta complete night was transformed to
complete day, as abruptly as if a switch had been turned.

Alf Neely and John Endlich blinked at each other. Maybe Neely was
embarrassed a little by his sudden exposure; but if he was, it didn't
show. Probably the bully in him was scared; but this he covered in a
common manner--with a studiedly easy swagger, and a bravado that was not
good sense, but bordered on childish recklessness. Yet he had a trump
card--by the aggressive glint in his eyes, and his unpleasant grin,
Endlich knew that Neely knew that he was afraid for his wife, and
wouldn't start anything unless driven and goaded sheerly wild. Even now,
they were seven to his one.

"Why, good morning, Neighbor Pun'kin-head!" Neely crooned, his voice a
burlesque of sweetness. "Glad to oblige!"

He hurled the great box down. As he did so, something glinted in his
gloved paw. He flicked it expertly into the open side of the wooden case
which contained so many things that were vital to the Endlichs--

It was only a tiny nuclear priming-cap, and the blast was feeble. Even
so, the box burst apart. Splintered crates, sealed cans, great torn
bundles and what not, went skittering far across the plain in every
direction, or were hurled high toward the stars, to begin falling at
last with the laziness of a descending feather.

       *       *       *       *       *

Neely and his companions hadn't attempted to move out of the way of the
explosion. They only rolled with its force, protected by their space
suits. Endlich rolled, too, helplessly, clutching his pistol and rifle:
still, by some superhuman effort, he managed to regain his feet before
the far more practiced Neely, who was hampered, no doubt, by a few too
many drinks, had even stopped rolling. But when Neely got up, he had
drawn his blaster, a useful tool of his trade, but a hellish weapon,
too, at short range.

Still, Endlich retained the drop on him.

Alf Neely chuckled. "Fourth of July! Hallowe'en, Dutch," he said
sweetly. "What's the matter? Don't you think it's fun? Honest to
gosh--you just ain't neighborly!"

Then he switched his tone. It became a soft snarl that didn't alter his
insolent and confident smirk--and a challenge. He laughed derisively,
almost softly. "I dare you to try to shoot straight, pal," he said.
"Even you got more sense than that."

And John Endlich was spang against his terrible, blank wall again. Seven
to one. Suppose he got three. There'd be four left--and more in the
camp. But the four would survive him. Space crazy lugs. Anyway half
drunk. Ready to hoot at the stars, even, if they found no better
diversion. Ready to push even any of their own bunch around who seemed
weaker than they. For spite, maybe. Or just for the lid-blowing hell of
it--as a reaction against the awful confinement of being out here.

"I was gonna smear you all over the place, Greenhorn," Neely rumbled.
"But maybe this way is more fun, hunh? Maybe we'll be back tonight. But
don't wait up for us. Our best regards to your sweet--family."

John Endlich's blazing and just rage was strangled by that same crawling
dread as before, as he saw them arc upward and away, propelled by the
miniature drive-jets attached to the belts of their space-suits. Their
return to camp, hundreds of miles distant, could be accomplished in a
couple of minutes.

Rose and the kids were crouched in the deflated tent. But returning
there, John Endlich hardly saw them. He hardly heard their frightened
questions.

To the trouble with Neely, he could see no end--just one destructive
visitation following another. Maybe, already, mortal damage had been
done. But Endlich couldn't lie down and quit, any more than a snake,
tossed into a fire, could stop trying to crawl out of it, as long as
life lasted. Whether doing so made sense or not, didn't matter. In
Endlich was the savage energy of despair. He was fighting not just Neely
and his crowd, but that other enemy--which was perhaps Neely's main
trouble, too. Yeah--the stillness, the nostalgia, the harshness.

"No--don't want any breakfast," he replied sharply to Rose' last
question. "Gotta work...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He was like an ant-swarm, rebuilding a trampled nest--oblivious to the
certainty of its being trampled again. First he scrambled and leaped
around, collecting his scattered and damaged gear. He found that his
main atomic battery--so necessary to all that he had to do--was damaged
and unworkable. And he had no hope that he could repair it. But this
didn't stop his feverish activity.

Now he started unrolling great bolts of a transparent, wire-strengthened
plastic. Patching with an adhesive where explosion-rents had to be
repaired, he cut hundred-yard strips, and, with Rose's help, laid them
edge to edge and fastened them together to make a continuous sheet.
Next, all around its perimeter, he dug a shallow trench. The edges of
the plastic were then attached to massive metal rails, which he buried
in the trench.

"Sealed to the ground along all the sides, Honey," he growled to Rose.
"Next we fit in the airlock cabinet, at one corner. Then we've got to
see if we can get up enough air to inflate the whole business. That's
the tough part--the way things are...."

By then the sun was already high. And Endlich was panting
raggedly--mostly from worry. After the massive airlock was in place,
they attached their electrolysis apparatus to the small atomic battery,
which had been used to run the well-driller. The well was in the area
covered by the sheet of plastic, which was now propped up here and there
with long pieces of board from the great box. Over their heads, the
tough, clear material sagged like a tent-roof which has not yet been run
up all the way on its poles.

Sluggishly the electrolysis apparatus broke down the water, discharging
the hydrogen as waste through a pipe, out over the airless surface of
Vesta--but freeing the oxygen under the plastic roof. Yet from the start
it was obvious that, with insufficient electric power, the process was
too slow.

"And we need to use heat-coils to thaw the ground, Johnny," Rose said.
"And to keep the place warm. And to bring nitrogen gas up out of the
soil. The few cylinders of the compressed stuff that we've got won't be
enough to make a start. And the carbon dioxide...."

So John Endlich had to try to repair that main battery. He thought,
after a while, that he might succeed--in time. But then Rose opened the
airlock, and the kids came in to bother him. With all the triumph of a
favorite puppy dragging an over-ripe bone into the house, Bubs bore a
crooked piece of a black substance, hard as wood and more gruesome than
a dried and moldy monkey-pelt.

"A tentacle!" Evelyn shrilled. "We were up to those old buildings! We
found the people! What's left of them! And lots of stuff. We saw one of
their cars! And there was lots more. Dad--you gotta come and see!..."

Harassed as he was, John Endlich yielded--because he had a hunch, an
idea of a possibility. So he went with his children. He passed through a
garden, where a pool had been, and where the blackened remains of plants
still projected from beds of dried soil set in odd stone-work. He passed
into chambers far too low for comfortable human habitation. And what did
he know of the uses of most of what he saw there? The niches in the
stone walls? The slanting, ramplike object of blackened wood, beside
which three weird corpses lay? The glazed plaque on the wall, which
could have been a religious emblem, a calendar of some kind, a
decoration, or something beyond human imagining? Yeah--leave such stuff
for Cousin Ernest, the school teacher--if he ever got here.

In the cylindrical stone shed nearby, John Endlich had a look at the
car--low slung, three-wheeled, a tiller, no seats. Just a flat platform.
All he could figure out about the motor was that steam seemed the link
between atomic energy and mechanical motion.

Beyond the car was what might be a small tractor. And a lot of odd
tools. But the thing which interested him most was the pattern of copper
ribbons, insulated with a heavy glaze, similar to that which he had seen
traversing walls and ceiling in the first building he had entered. Here,
as before, they connected with queer apparatus which might be stoves and
non-rotary motors, for all he knew. And also with the globes overhead.

The suggestiveness of all this was plain. And now, at the far end of
that cylindrical shed, John Endlich found the square, black-enamelled
case, where all of those copper ribbons came together.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was sealed, and apparently self-contained. Nothing could have damaged
it very much, in the frigid stillness of millions of years. Its secrets
were hidden within it. But they could not be too unfamiliar. And its
presence was logical. A small, compact power unit. Nervously, he turned
a little wheel. A faint vibration was transmitted to his gloved hand.
And the globe in the ceiling began to glow.

He shut the thing off again. But how long did it take him to run back to
his sagging creation of clear plastic, while the kids howled gleefully
around him, and return with the end of a long cable, and pliers? How
long did it take him to disconnect all of the glazed copper ribbons, and
substitute the wires of the cable--attaching them to queer
terminal-posts? No--not long.

The power was not as great as that which his own large atomic battery
would have supplied. But it proved sufficient. And the current was
direct--as it was supposed to be. The electrolysis apparatus bubbled
vigorously. Slowly the tentlike roof began to rise, under the beginnings
of a tiny gas-pressure.

"That does it, Pops!" Bubs shrilled.

"Yeah--maybe so," John Endlich agreed almost optimistically. He felt
really tender toward his kids, just then. They'd really helped him, for
once.

Yes--almost he was hopeful. Until he glanced at the rapidly declining
sun. An all-night vigil. No. Probably worse. Oh Lord--how long could he
last like this? Even if he managed to keep Neely and Company at bay?
Night after night.... All that he had accomplished seemed useless. He
just had so much more that could be wrecked--pushed over with a harsh
laugh, as if it really was something funny.

John Endlich's flesh crawled. And in his thinking, now, he went a little
against his own determinations. Probably because, in the present state
of his disgust, he needed a drink--bad.

"Nuts!" he growled lugubriously. "If I'd only been a little more
sociable.... That was where the trouble started. I might have got broke,
but I would've made friends. They think I'm snooty."

Rose's jaw hardened, as if she took his regrets as an accusation that
she had led him along the straight and narrow path, which--by an
exasperating shift in philosophical principle--now seemed the shortest
route to destruction. But he felt very sorry for her, too; and he didn't
believe that what he had just said was entirely the truth.

So he added: "I don't mean it, Honey. I'm just griping."

She softened. "You've got to eat, Johnny," she said. "You haven't eaten
all day. And tonight you've got to sleep. I'll keep watch. Maybe it'll
be all right...."

Well, anyway it was nice to know that his wife was like that.
Yeah--gentle, and fairminded. After they had all eaten supper, he tried
hard to keep awake. Fear helped him to do so more than ever. Their tent
was now covered by the rising plastic roof--but beyond the clear
substance, he could still watch for starlight to be stopped by prowling
forms, out there at the jagged rim of Vesta. It was hell to feel your
skin puckering, and yet to have exhaustion pushing your eyelids down
inexorably....

Somewhere he lost the hold on himself. And he dreamed that Alf Neely and
he were fighting with their fists. And he was being beaten to a pulp.
But he was wishing desperately that he could win. Then they could have a
drink, and maybe be friends. But he knew hopelessly that things weren't
quite that simple, either.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awoke to blink at blazing sunshine. Then his whole body became clammy
with perspiration, as he thought of his lapse from responsibility;
glancing over, he saw that Rose was sleeping as soundly as the kids. His
wide eyes searched for the disaster that he knew he'd find....

But the wide roof was all the way up, now--intact. It made a great,
squarish bubble, the skin of which was specially treated to stop the
hard and dangerous part of the ultra-violet rays of the sun, and also
the lethal portion of the cosmic rays. It even had an inter-skin layer
of gum that could seal the punctures that grain-of-sand-sized meteors
might make. But meteors, though plentiful in the asteroid belt, were
curiously innocuous. They all moved in much the same direction as the
large asteroids, and at much the same velocity--so their relative speed
had to be low.

The walls of the small tent around Endlich sagged, where they had bulged
tautly before--showing that there was now a firm and equal pressure
beyond them. The electrolysis apparatus had been left active all night,
and the heating units. This was the result.

John Endlich was at first almost unbelieving when he saw that nothing
had been wrecked during the night. For a moment he was elated. He woke
up his family by shouting: "Look! The bums stayed away! They didn't
come! Look! We've got five acres of ground, covered by air that we can
breathe!"

His sense of triumph, however, was soon dampened. Yes--he'd been left
unmolested--for one night. But had that been done only to keep him at a
fruitless and sleepless watch? Probably. Another delicate form of
hazing. And it meant nothing for the night to come--or for those to
follow. So he was in the same harrowing position as before, pursued only
by a wild and defenseless drive to get things done. To find some slight
illusion of security by working to build a sham of normal, Earthly life.
To shut out the cold vacuum, and a little of the bluntness of the voidal
stars. To make certain reassuring sounds possible around him.

"Got to patch up the pieces of the house, first, and bolt 'em together,
Rose," he said feverishly. "Kids--maybe you could help by setting out
some of the hydroponic troughs for planting. We gotta break plain
ground, too, as soon as it's thawed enough. We gotta...." His words
raced on with his flying thoughts.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a mad day of toil. The hours were pitifully short. They couldn't
be stretched to cover more than a fraction of all the work that Endlich
wanted to get done. But the low gravity reduced the problem of heavy
lifting to almost zero, at least. And he did get the house assembled--so
that Rose and the kids and he could sleep inside its sealed doors.
Sealed, that is, if Neely or somebody didn't use a blaster or an
explosive cap or bullet--in an orgy of perverted humor.... He still had
no answer for that.

Rose and the children toiled almost as hard as he did. Rose even managed
to find a couple of dozen eggs, that--by being carefully packed to
withstand a spaceship's takeoff--had withstood the effects of Neely's
idea of fun. She set up an incubator, and put them inside, to be
hatched.

But, of course, sunset came again--with the same pendent threat as
before. Nerve-twisting. Terrible. And a vigil was all but impossible.
John Endlich was out on his feet--far more than just dog-tired....

"That damned Neely," he groaned, almost too weary even to swallow his
food, in spite of the luxury of a real, pullman-style supper table. "He
doesn't lose sleep. He can pick his time to come here and raise hob!"

Rose's glance was strange--almost guilty. "Tonight I think he might have
to stay home--too," she said.

John Endlich blinked at her.

"All right," she answered, rather defensively. "So to speak, Johnny, I
called the cops. Yesterday--with the small radio transmitter. When you
and Bubs and Evelyn were up in those old buildings. I reported Neely and
his companions."

"Reported them?"

"Sure. To Mr. Mahoney, the boss at the mining camp. I was glad to find
out that there is a little law and order around here. Mr. Mahoney was
nice. He said that he wouldn't be surprised if they were cooled in the
can for a few days, and then confined to the camp area. Matter of fact,
I radioed him again last night. It's been done."

John Endlich's vast sigh of relief was slightly tainted by the idea that
to call on a policing power for protection was a little bit on the timid
side.

"Oh," he grunted. "Thanks. I never thought of doing that."

"Johnny."

"Yeah?"

"I kind of got the notion, though--from between the lines of what Mr.
Mahoney said--that there was heavy trouble brewing at the camp. About
conditions, and home-leaves, and increased profit-sharing. Maybe there's
danger of riots and what-not, Johnny. Anyhow, Mr. Mahoney said that we
should 'keep on exercising all reasonable caution.'"

"Hmm-m--Mr. Mahoney is _very_ nice, ain't he?" Endlich growled.

"You stop that, Johnny," Rose ordered.

But her husband had already passed beyond thoughts of jealousy. He was
thinking of the time when Neely would have worked out his sentence, and
would be free to roam around again--no doubt with increased annoyance at
the Endlich clan for causing his restraint. If a riot or something
didn't spring him, beforehand. John Endlich itched to try to tear his
head off. But, of course, the same consequences as before still
applied....

       *       *       *       *       *

As it turned out, the Endlichs had a reprieve of two months and fourteen
days, almost to the hour and figured on a strictly Earth-time scale.

For what it was worth, they accomplished a great deal. In their great
plastic greenhouse, supported like a colossal bubble by the humid,
artificially-warmed air inside it, long troughs were filled with pebbles
and hydroponic solution. And therein tomatoes were planted, and lettuce,
radishes, corn, onions, melons--just about everything in the vegetable
line.

There remained plenty of ground left over from the five acres, so John
Endlich tinkered with that fifty-million-year-old tractor, figured out
its atomic-power-to-steam principle, and used it to help harrow up the
ancient soil of a smashed planet. He added commercial fertilizers and
nitrates to it--the nitrates were, of course, distinct from the gaseous
nitrogen that had been held, spongelike, by the subsoil, and had helped
supply the greenhouse with atmosphere. Then he harrowed the ground
again. The tractor worked fine, except that the feeble gravity made the
lugs of its wheels slip a lot. He repeated his planting, in the
old-fashioned manner.

Under ideal conditions, the inside of the great bubble was soon a mass
of growing things. Rose had planted flowers--to be admired, and to help
out the hive of bees, which were essential to some of the other plants,
as well. Nor was the flora limited to the Earthly. Some seeds or spores
had survived, here, from the mother world of the asteroids. They came
out of their eons of suspended animation, to become root and tough,
spiky stalk, and to mix themselves sparsely with vegetation that had
immigrated from Earth, now that livable conditions had been restored
over this little piece of ground. But whether they were fruit or weed,
it was difficult to say.

Sometimes John Endlich was misled. Sometimes, listening to familiar
sounds, and smelling familiar odors, toward the latter part of his
reprieve, he almost imagined that he'd accomplished his basic desires
here on Vesta--when he had always failed on Earth.

There was the smell of warm soil, flowers, greenery. He heard irrigation
water trickling. The sweetcorn rustled in the wind of fans he'd set up
to circulate the air. Bees buzzed. Chickens, approaching adolescence,
peeped contentedly as they dusted themselves and stretched luxuriously
in the shadows of the cornfield.

For John Endlich it was all like the echo of a somnolent summer of his
boyhood. There was peace in it: it was like a yearning fulfilled. An end
of wanderlust for him, here on Vesta. In contrast to the airless
desolation outside, the interior of this five-acre greenhouse was the
one most desirable place to be. So, except for the vaguest of stirrings
sometimes in his mind, there was not much incentive to seek fun
elsewhere. If he ever had time.

And there was a lot of the legendary, too, in what his family and he had
accomplished. It was like returning a little of the blue sky and the
sounds of life to this land of ruins and roadways and the ghosts of dead
beauty. Maybe there'd be a lot more of all that, soon, when the rumored
major influx of homesteaders reached Vesta.

"Yes, Johnny," Rose said once. "'Legendary' is a lot nicer word than
'ghostly'. And the ghosts are changing their name to legends."

Rose had to teach the kids their regular lessons. That children would be
taught was part of the agreement you had to sign at the A. H. O. before
you could be shipped out with them. But the kids had time for whimsy,
too. In make-believe, they took their excursions far back to former
ages. They played that they were "Old People."

Endlich, having repaired his atomic battery, didn't draw power anymore
from the unit that had supplied the ancient buildings. But the relics
remained. From a device like a phonograph, there was even a bell-like
voice that chanted when a lever was pressed.

And it was the kids who found the first "tay-tay bug," a day
after its trills were heard from among the new foliage.
"Ta-a-a-ay-y-y--ta-a-a-a-ay-y-yy-y--" The sound was like that of a
little wheel, humming with the speed of rotation, and then slowing to a
scratchy stop.

A one-legged hopper, with a thin but rigid gliding wing of horn.
Opalescent in its colors. It had evidently hatched from a tiny egg,
preserved by the cold for ages.

Wise enough not to clutch it with his bare hands, Bubs came running with
it held in a leaf.

It proved harmless. It was ugly and beautiful. Its great charm was that
it was a vocal echo from the far past.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sure. Life got to be fairly okay, in spite of hard work. The Endlichs
had conquered the awful stillness with life-sounds. Growing plants kept
the air in their greenhouse fresh and breathable by photosynthesis. John
Endlich did a lot of grinning and whistling. His temper never flared
once. Deep down in him there was only a brooding certainty that the calm
couldn't last. For, from all reports, trouble seethed at the mining
camp. At any time there might be a blowup, a reign of terror that would
roll over all of Vesta. A thing to release pent-up forces in men who had
seen too many hard stars, and had heard too much stillness. They were
like the stuff inside a complaining volcano.

The Endlichs had sought to time their various crops, so that they would
all be ready for market on as nearly as possible the same day. It was
intended as a trick of advertising--a dramatically sudden appearance of
much fresh produce.

So, one morning, in a jet-equipped space-suit, Endlich arced out for the
mining camp. Inside the suit he carried samples from his garden. Six
tomatoes. Beauties.

"Have luck with them, Johnny! But watch out!" Rose flung after him by
helmet phone. With a warm laugh. Just for a moment he felt maybe a
little silly. Tomatoes! But they were what he was banking on, and had
forced toward maturity, most. The way he figured, they were the kind of
fruit that the guys in the camp--gagged by a diet of canned and
dehydrated stuff, because they were too busy chasing mineral wealth to
keep a decent hydroponic garden going--would be hungriest for.

Well--he was rather too right, in some ways, to be fortunate. Yeah--they
still call what happened the Tomato War.

Poor Johnny Endlich. He was headed for the commissary dome to display
his wares. But vague urges sidetracked him, and he went into the
recreation dome of the camp, instead.

And into the bar.

The petty sin of two drinks hardly merits the punishing trouble which
came his way as, at least partially, a result. With his face-window
open, he stood at the bar with men whom he had never seen before. And he
began to have minor delusions of grandeur. He became a little too proud
of his accomplishments. His wariness slipped into abeyance. He had a
queer idea that, as a farmer with concrete evidence of his skills to
show, he would win respect that had been denied him. Dread of
consequences of some things that he might do, became blurred. His hot
temper began to smolder, under the spark of memory and the fury of
insult and malicious tricks, that, considering the safety of his loved
ones, he had had no way to fight back against. Frustration is a
dangerous force. Released a little, it excited him more. And the tense
mood of the camp--a thing in the very air of the domes--stirred him up
more. The camp--ready to explode into sudden, open barbarism for
days--was now at a point where nothing so dramatic as fresh tomatoes and
farmers in a bar was needed to set the fireworks off.

John Endlich had his two drinks. Then, with calm and foolhardy
detachment, he set the six tomatoes out in a row before him on the
synthetic mahogany.

       *       *       *       *       *

He didn't have to wait at all for results. Bloodshot eyes, some of them
belonging to men who had been as gentle as lambs in their ordinary lives
on Earth, turned swiftly alert. Bristly faces showed swift changes of
expression: surprise, interest, greed for possession--but most of all,
aggressive and Satanic humor.

"_Jeez--tamadas!_" somebody growled, amazed.

Under the circumstances, to be aware of opportunity was to act. Big
paws, some bare and calloused, some in the gloves of space suits,
reached out, grabbed. Teeth bit. Juice squirted, landing on hard metal
shaped for the interplanetary regions.

So far, fine. John Endlich felt prouder of himself--he'd expected a
certain fierceness and lack of manners. But knowing all he did know, he
should have taken time to visualize the inevitable chain-reaction.

"Thanks, pal.... You're a prince...."

Sure--but the thanks were more of a mockery than a formality.

"Hey! None for me? Whatsa idea?..."

"Shuddup, Mic.... Who's dis guy?... Say, Friend--you wouldn't be that
pun'kin-head we been hearin' about, would you?... Well--my gracious--bet
you are! Dis'll be nice to watch!..."

"Where's Alf Neely, Cranston? What we need is excitement."

"Seen him out by the slot-machines. The bar is still out of bounds for
him. He can't come in here."

"Says who? Boss Man Mahoney? For dis much sport Neely can go straight to
hell! And take Boss Man with him on a pitchfork.... Hey-y-y!...
Ne-e-e-e-l-y-y-y!..."

The big man whose name was called lumbered to the window at the entrance
to the bar, and peered inside. During the last couple of months he'd
been in a perpetual grouch over his deprivation of liberty, which had
rankled him more as an affront to his dignity.

When he saw the husband of the authoress of his woes--the little bum,
who, being unable to guard his own, had allowed his woman to holler
"Cop!"--Neely let out a yell of sheer glee. His huge shoulders hunched,
his pendulous nose wobbled, his squinty eyes gleamed and he charged into
the bar.

John Endlich's first reaction was curiously similar to Neely's. He felt
a flash of savage triumph under the stimulus of the thought of immediate
battle with the cause of most of his troubles. Temper blazed in him.

Belatedly, however, the awareness came into his mind that he had started
an emotional avalanche that went far beyond the weight and fury of one
man like Neely. Lord, wouldn't he ever learn? It was tough as hell to
crawl, but how could a man put his wife and kids in awful jeopardy at
the hands of a flock of guys whom space had turned into gorillas?

Endlich tried for peace. It was to his credit that he did so quite
coolly. He turned toward his charging adversary and grinned.

"Hi, Neely," he said. "Have a drink--on me."

The big man stopped short, almost in unbelief that anyone could stoop so
low as to offer appeasement. Then he laughed uproariously.

"Why, I'd be delighted, Mr. Pun'kins," he said in a poisonous-sweet
tone. "Let bygones be bygones. Hey, Charlie! Hear what Pun'kins says?
The drinks are all on him! And how is the Little Lady, Mrs. Pun'kins?
Lonesome, I bet. Glad to hear it. I'm gonna fix that!"

With a sudden lunge Neely gripped Endlich's hand, and gave it a savage
if momentary twist that sent needles of pain shooting up the
homesteader's arm. It was a goading invitation to battle, which grim
knowledge of the sequel now compelled Endlich to pass up.

"Don't call him Pun'kins, Neely!" somebody yelled. "It ain't polite to
mispronounce a name. It's Mr. Tomatoes. I just saw. Bet he's got a
million of 'em, out there on the farm!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The whole crowd in the bar broke into coarse shouts and laughs and
comments. "... We ain't good neighbors--neglecting our social duties.
Let's pay 'em a visit.... Pun'kins! What else you got besides tamadas?
Let's go on a picnic!... Hell with the Boss Man!... Yah-h-h--We need
some diversion.... I'm not goin' on shift.... Come on, everybody!
There's gonna be a fight--a moider!... Hell with the Boss Man...."

Like the flicker of flame flashing through dry gunpowder, you could feel
the excitement spread. Out of the bar. Out of the rec-dome. It would
soon ignite the whole tense camp.

John Endlich's heart was in his mouth, as his mind pictured the part of
all this that would affect him and his. A bunch of men gone wild,
kicking over the traces, arcing around Vesta, sacking and destroying in
sheer exuberance, like brats on Hallowe'en. They would stop at nothing.
And Rose and the kids....

This was it. What he'd been so scared of all along. It was at least
partly his own fault. And there was no way to stop it now.

"I love tomatoes, Mr. Pun'kins," Neely rumbled at Endlich's side,
reaching for the drink that had been set before him. "But first I'm
gonna smear you all over the camp.... Take my time--do a good job....
Because y'didn't give me any tomatoes...."

Whereat, John Endlich took the only slender advantage at hand for
him--surprise. With all the strength of his muscular body, backed up by
dread and pent-up fury, he sent a gloved fist crashing straight into
Neely's open face-window. Even the pang in his well-protected knuckles
was a satisfaction--for he knew that the damage to Neely's ugly features
must be many times greater.

The blow, occurring under the conditions of Vesta's tiny gravity, had an
entirely un-Earthly effect. Neely, eyes glazing, floated gently up and
away. And Endlich, since he had at the last instant clutched Neely's
arm, was drawn along with the miner in a graceful, arcing flight through
the smoky air of the bar. Both armored bodies, lacking nothing in
inertia, tore through the tough plastic window, and they bounced lightly
on the pavement of the main section of the rec-dome.

Neely was as limp as a wet rag, sleeping peacefully, blood all over his
crushed face. But that he was out of action signified no peace, when so
many of his buddies were nearby, and beginning to seethe, like a swarm
of hornets.

So there was an element of despair in Endlich's quick actions as he
slammed Neely's face-window and his own shut, picked up his enemy, and
used his jets to propel him in the long leap to the airlock of the dome.
He had no real plan. He just had the ragged and all but hopeless thought
of using Neely as a hostage--as a weapon in the bitter and desperate
attempt to defend his wife and children from the mob that would be
following close behind him....

Tumbling end over end with his light but bulky burden, he sprawled at
the threshold of the airlock, where the guard, posted there, had stepped
hastily out of his way. Again, capricious luck, surprise, and swift
action were on his side. He pressed the control-button of the lock, and
squirmed through its double valves before the startled guard could stop
him.

Then he slammed his jets wide, and aimed for the horizon.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a wild journey--for, to fly straight in a frictionless vacuum,
any missile must be very well balanced; and the inertia and the slight
but unwieldy weight of Neely's bulk disturbed such balance in his own
jet-equipped space suit. The journey was made, then, not in a smooth
arc, but in a series of erratic waverings. But what Endlich lacked in
precise direction, he made up in sheer reckless, dread-driven speed.

From the very start of that wild flight, he heard voices in his helmet
phones:

"Damn pun'kin-head greenhorn! Did you see how he hit Neely, Schmidt?
Yeah--by surprise.... Yeah--Kuzak. I saw. He hit without warning....
Damn yella yokel.... Who's comin' along to get him?..."

Sure--there was another side to it--other voices:

"Shucks--Neely had it coming to him. I hope the farmer really murders
that big lunkhead.... You ain't kiddin', Muir. I was glad to see his
face splatter like a rotten tamata...."

Okay--fine. It was good to know you had some sensible guys on your side.
But what good was it, when the camp as a whole was boiling over from its
internal troubles? There were more than enough roughnecks to do a mighty
messy job--fast.

Panting with tension, Endlich swooped down before his greenhouse, and
dragged Neely inside through the airlock. For a fleeting instant the
sights and sounds and smells that impinged on his senses, as he opened
his face-window once more, brought him a regret. The rustle of corn, the
odor of greenery, the chicken voices--there was home in all of this.
Something pastoral and beautiful and orderly--gained with hard work. And
something brought back--restored--from the remote past. The buzzing of
the tay-tay bug was even a real echo from that smashed yet undoubtedly
once beautiful world of antiquity.

But these were fragile concerns, beside the desperate question of the
immediate safety of Rose and the kids.... Already cries and shouts and
comments were coming faintly through his helmet phones again:

"Get the yokel! Get the bum!... We'll fix his wagon good...."

The pack was on the way--getting closer with every heartbeat. Never in
his life had Endlich experienced so harrowing a time as this; never, if
by some miracle he lived, could he expect another equal to it.

To stand and fight, as he would have done if he were alone, would mean
simply that he would be cut down. To try the peacemaking of appeasement,
would have probably the same result--plus, for himself, the dishonor of
contempt.

So, where was there to turn, with grim, unanswering blankness on every
side?

       *       *       *       *       *

John Endlich felt mightily an old yearning--that of a fundamentally
peaceful man for a way to oppose and win against brutal, overpowering
odds without using either serious violence or the even more futile
course of supine submission. Here on Vesta, this had been the issue he
had faced all along. In many ages and many nations--and probably on many
planets throughout the universe--others had faced it before him.

To his straining and tortured mind the trite and somewhat mocking
answers came: Psychology. Salesmanship. The selling of respect for one's
self.

Ah, yes. These were fine words. Glib words. But the question, "How?" was
more bitter and derisive than ever.

Still, he had to try something--to make at least a forlorn effort. And
now, from certain beliefs that he had, coupled with some vague
observations that he had made during the last hour, a tattered
suggestion of what form that effort might take, came to him.

As for his personal defects that had given him trouble in the
past--well--he was lugubriously sure that he had learned a final lesson
about liquor. For him it always meant trouble. As for wanderlust, and
the gambling and hell-raising urge--he had been willing to stay put on
Vesta, named for the goddess of home, for weeks, now. And he was now
about to make his last great gamble. If he lost, he wouldn't be alive to
gamble again. If, by great good-fortune, he won--well he was certain
that all the charm of unnecessary chance-taking would, by the memory of
these awful moments, be forever poisoned in him.

Now Rose and the youngsters came hurrying toward him.

"Back so soon, Johnny?" Rose called. "What's this? What happened?"

"Who's the guy, Pop?" Evelyn asked. "Oh--Baloney Nose.... What are you
doing with him?"

But by then they all had guessed some of the tense mood, and its
probable meaning.

"Neely's pals are coming, Honey," Endlich said quietly. "It's the
showdown. Hide the kids. And yourself. Quick. Under the house, maybe."

Rose's pale eyes met his. They were comprehending, they were worried,
but they were cool. He could see that she didn't want to leave him.

Evelyn looked as though she might begin to whimper; but her small jaw
hardened.

Bubs' lower lip trembled. But he said valiantly: "I'll get the guns,
Pop, I'm stayin' with yuh."

"No you're not, son," John Endlich answered. "Get going. Orders. Get the
guns to keep with you--to watch out for Mom and Sis."

Rose took the kids away with her, without a word. Endlich wondered how
to describe what was maybe her last look at him. There were no fancy
words in his mind. Just Love. And deep concern.

Alf Neely was showing signs of returning consciousness. Which was good.
Still dragging him, Endlich went and got a bushel basket. It was filled
to the brim with ripe, red tomatoes, but he could carry its tiny weight
on the palm of one hand, scarcely noticing that it was there.

For an instant Endlich scanned the sky, through the clear plastic roof
of the great bubble. He saw at least a score of shapes in space armor,
arcing nearer--specks in human form, glowing with reflected sunlight,
like little hurtling moons among the stars. Neely's pals. In a moment
they would arrive.

       *       *       *       *       *

Endlich took Neely and the loaded basket close to the transparent side
of the greenhouse, nearest the approaching roughnecks. There he removed
Neely's oxygen helmet, hoping that, maybe, this might deter his friends
a little from rupturing the plastic of the huge bubble and letting the
air out. It was a feeble safeguard, for, in all probability, in case of
such rupture, Neely would be rescued from death by smothering and cold
and the boiling of his blood, simply by having his helmet slammed back
on again.

Next, Endlich dumped the contents of the basket on the ground, inverted
it, and sat Neely upon it. The big man had recovered consciousness
enough to be merely groggy by now. Endlich slapped his battered face
vigorously, to help clear his head--after having, of course, relieved
him of the blaster at his belt.

Endlich left his own face-window open, so that the sounds of Neely's
voice could penetrate to the mike of his own helmet phone, thus to be
transmitted to the helmet phones of Neely's buddies.

Endlich was anything but calm inside, with the wild horde, as
irresponsible in their present state of mind as a pack of idiot baboons,
bearing down on him. But he forced his tone to be conversational when he
spoke.

"Hello, Neely," he said. "You mentioned you liked tomatoes. Maybe you
were kidding. Anyhow I brought you along home with me, so you could have
some. Here on the ground, right in front of you, is a whole bushel. The
regular asteroids price--considering the trouble it takes to grow 'em,
and the amount of dough a guy like you can make for himself out here, is
five bucks apiece. But for you, right now, they're all free. Here, have
a nice fresh, ripe one, Neely."

The big man glared at his captor for a second, after he had looked
dazedly around. He would have leaped to his feet--except that the muzzle
of his own blaster was leveled at the center of his chest, at a range of
not over twenty inches. For a fleeting instant, Neely looked scared and
prudent. Then he saw his pals, landing like a flock of birds, just
beyond the transparent side of the greenhouse. And he heard their
shouts, coming loudly from Endlich's helmet-phones:

"We come after you, Neely! We'll get the damn yokel off your neck....
Come on, guys--let's turn the damn place upside down!..."

Neely grew courageous--yes, maybe it did take a certain animal nerve to
do what he did. His battered and bloodied lip curled.

"Whatdayuh think you're up to, Pun'kin-head!" he snarled slowly, his
tone dripping contempt for the insanely foolish. He laughed sourly,
"Haw-haw-haw." Then his face twisted into a confident and mocking leer.
To carry the mockery farther, a big paw reached out and grabbed the
proffered tomato from Endlich's hand. "Sure--thanks. Anything to
oblige!" He took a great bite from the fruit, clowning the action
with a forced expression of relish. "Ummm!" he grunted. In danger, he
was being the showman, playing for the approval of his pals. He was
proving his comic coolness--that even now he was master of the
situation, and was in no hurry to be rescued. "Come on, punk!" he
ordered Endlich. "Where is the next one, seeing you're so generous? Be
polite to your guest!"

Endlich handed him a second tomato. But as he did so, it seemed all the
things he dreaded would happen were breathing down his back. For the
faces that he glimpsed beyond the plastic showed the twisted expressions
that betray the point where savage humor imperceptibly becomes
murderous. A dozen blasters were leveled at him.

But the eyes of the men outside showed, too, the kind of interest that
any odd procedure can command. They stood still for a moment, watching,
commenting:

"Hey--Neely! See if you can down the next one with one bite!... Don't
eat 'em all, Neely! Save some for us!..."

Endlich was following no complete plan. He had only the feeling that
somewhere here there might be a dramatic touch that, by a long chance,
would yield him a toehold on the situation. Without a word, he gave
Neely a third tomato. Then a fourth and a fifth....

Neely kept gobbling and clowning.

Yeah--but can this sort of horseplay go on until one man has consumed an
entire bushel of tomatoes? The question began to shine speculatively in
the faces of the onlookers. It began to appeal to their wolfish sense of
comedy. And it started to betray itself--in another manner--in Neely's
face.

       *       *       *       *       *

After the fifteenth tomato, he burped and balked. "That's enough kiddin'
around, Pun'kin-head," he growled. "Get away with your damned garden
truck! I should be beatin' you to a grease-spot right this minute!
Why--I--"

Then Neely tried to lunge for the blaster. As Endlich squeezed the
trigger, he turned the weapon aside a trifle, so that the beam of energy
flicked past Neely's ear and splashed garden soil that turned
incandescent, instantly.

John Endlich might have died in that moment, cut down from behind. That
he wasn't probably meant that, from the position of complete underdog
among the spectators, his popularity had risen some.

"Neely," he said with a grin, "how can you start beatin', when you ain't
done eatin'? Neely--here I am, trying to be friendly and hospitable, and
you aren't co-operating. A whole bushel of juicy tomatoes--symbols of
civilization way the hell out here in the asteroids--and you haven't
even made a dent in 'em yet! What's the matter, Neely? Lose your
appetite? Here! Eat!..."

Endlich's tone was falsely persuasive. For there was a steely note of
command in it. And the blaster in Endlich's hand was pointed straight at
Neely's chest.

Neely's eyes began to look frightened and sullen. He shifted
uncomfortably, and the bushel basket creaked under his weight. "You're
yella as any damn pun'kin!" he said loudly. "You don't fight fair!...
Guys--what's the matter with you? Get this nut with the blaster offa
me!..."

"Hmm--yella," Endlich seemed to muse. "Maybe not as yella as you were
once--coming around here at night with a whole gang, not so long ago--"

"Call _me_ yella?" Nelly hollered. "Why, you lousy damn yokel, if you
didn't have that blaster--"

Endlich said grimly, "But I got it, friend!" He sent a stream of energy
from the blaster right past Neely's head, so close that a shock of the
other's hair smoked and curled into black wisps. "And watch your
language--my wife and kids can hear you--"

Neely's thick shoulders hunched. He ducked nervously, rubbing his
head--and for the first time there was a hint of genuine alarm in his
voice. "All right," he growled, "all right! Take it easy--"

Something deep within John Endlich relaxed--a cold tight knot seemed to
unwind--for, at that moment, he knew that Neely was beginning to lose.
The big man's evident discomfort and fear were the marks of weakness--to
his followers at least; and with them, he could never be a leader,
again. Moreover, he had allowed himself to be maneuvered into the
position of being the butt of a practical joke, that, by his own code,
must be followed up, to its nasty, if interesting, outcome. The
spectators began to resemble Romans at the circus, with Neely the
victim. And the victim's downfall was tragically swift.

"Come on, Neely! You heard what Pun'kins said," somebody yelled.
"Jeez--a whole bushel. Let's see how many you can eat, Neely.... Damned
if this ain't gonna be rich! Don't let us down, Neely! Nobody's hurtin'
yuh. All you have to do is eat--all them nice tamadas.... Hey, Neely--if
that bushel ain't enough for you, I'll personally buy you another, at
the reg'lar price. Haw-haw-haw.... Lucky Neely! Look at him! Having a
swell banquet. Better than if he was home.... Haw-haw-haw.... Come on,
Pun'kins--make him eat!..."

Yeah, under certain conditions human nature can be pretty fickle.
Wonderingly, John Endlich felt himself to be respected--the Top Man. The
guy who had shown courage and ingenuity, and was winning, by the harsh
code of men who had been roughened and soured by space--by life among
the asteroids.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a little while then, he had to be hard. He thrust another tomato
toward Neely, at the same time directing a thin stream from the
blaster just past the big nose. Neely ate six more tomatoes with a will,
his eyes popping, sweat streaming down his forehead.

Endlich's next blaster-stream barely missed Neely's booted toe. The
persuasive shot was worth fifty-five more dollars in garden fruit
consumed. The crowd gave with mock cheers and bravos, and demanded more
action.

"That makes thirty-two.... Come on, Neely--that's just a good start. You
got a long, long ways to go.... Come on, Pun'kins--bet you can stuff
fifty into him...."

To goad Neely on in this ludicrous and savage game, Endlich next just
scorched the metal at Neely's shoulder. It isn't to be said that Endlich
didn't enjoy his revenge--for all the anguish and real danger that Neely
had caused him. But as this fierce yet childish sport went on, and the
going turned really rough for the big asteroid miner, Endlich's anger
began to be mixed with self-disgust. He'd always be a hot-tempered guy;
he couldn't help that. But now, satisfaction, and a hopeful glimpse of
peace ahead, burned the fury out of him and touched him with shame.
Still, for a little more, he had to go on. Again and again, as before,
he used that blaster. But, as he did so, he talked, ramblingly, knowing
that the audience, too, would hear what he said. Maybe, in a way, it was
a lecture; but he couldn't help that:

"Have another tomato, Neely. Sorry to do things like this--but it's your
own way. So why should you complain? Funny, ain't it? A man can get even
too many tomatoes. Civilized tomatoes. Part of something most guys
around here have been homesick for, for a long time.... Maybe that's
what has been most of the trouble out here in the asteroids. Not enough
civilization. On Earth we were used to certain standards--in spite of
being rough enough there, too. Here, the traces got kicked over. But on
this side of Vesta, an idea begins to soak in: This used to be nice
country--blue sky, trees growing. Some of that is coming back, Neely.
And order with it. Because, deep in our guts, that's what we all want.
And fresh vegetables'll help.... Have another tomato, Neely. Or should
we call it enough, guys?"

[Illustration: _Endlich's voice was steely ... "Sorry to do things like
this--but it's your way!"_]

"Neely, you ain't gonna quit now?" somebody guffawed. "You're doin'
almost good. Haw-haw!"

Neely's face was purple. His eyes were bloodshot. His mouth hung partly
open. "Gawd--no--please!" he croaked.

An embarrassed hush fell over the crowd. Back home on Earth, they had
all been more-or-less average men. Finally someone said, expressing the
intrusion among them of the better dignity of man:

"Aw--let the poor dope go...."

Then and there, John Endlich sold what was left of his first bushel of
tomatoes. One of his customers--the once loud-mouthed Schmidt--even
said, rather stiffly, "Pun'kins--you're all right."

And these guys were the real roughnecks of the mining camp.

Is it necessary to mention that, as they were leaving, Neely lost his
pride completely, soiling the inside of his helmet's face-window so that
he could scarcely see out of it? That, amid the raucous laughter of his
companions, which still sounded slightly self-conscious and pitying.
Thus Alf Neely sank at last to the level of helpless oblivion and
nonentity.

       *       *       *       *       *

A week of Vestal days later, in the afternoon, Rose and the kids came to
John Endlich, who was toiling over his cucumbers.

"Their name is Harper, Pop!" Bubs shouted.

"And they've got three children!" Evelyn added.

John Endlich, straightened, shaking a kink out of his tired back. "Who?"
he questioned.

"The people who are going to be our new neighbors, Johnny," Rose said
happily. "We just picked up the news on the radio--from their ship,
which is approaching from space right now! I hope they're nice folks.
And, Johnny--there used to be country schools with no more than five
pupils...."

"Sure," John Endlich said.

Something felt warm around his heart. Leave it to a woman to think of a
school--the symbol of civilization, marching now across the void. John
Endlich thought of the trouble at the mining camp, which his first load
of fresh vegetables, picked up by a small space boat, had perhaps helped
to end. He thought of the relics in this strange land. Things that were
like legends of a lost pastoral beauty. Things that could come back. The
second family of homesteaders was almost here. Endlich was reconciled to
domesticity. He felt at home; he felt proud.

Bees buzzed near him. A tay-tay bug from a perished era, hummed and
scraped out a mournful sound.

"I wonder if the Harper kids'll call you Mr. Pun'kins, Pop," Bubs
remarked. "Like the miners still do."

John Endlich laughed. But somehow he was prouder than ever. Maybe the
name would be a legend, too.





End of Project Gutenberg's Asteroid of Fear, by Raymond Zinke Gallun

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTEROID OF FEAR ***

***** This file should be named 32780.txt or 32780.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/7/8/32780/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
