The Project Gutenberg EBook of All Jackson's Children, by Daniel F. Galouye

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: All Jackson's Children

Author: Daniel F. Galouye

Release Date: February 11, 2016 [EBook #51185]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL JACKSON'S CHILDREN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










                        All Jackson's Children

                         By DANIEL F. GALOUYE

                         Illustrated by FINLAY

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction January 1957.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




             Their chances hung literally on a prayer ...
              which they had to answer all by themselves!


Angus McIntosh vigorously scuffed the tarnished nameplate on the
wrecked cargo carrier. Then he stepped back and squinted under shaggy
gray eyebrows.

Letter by letter, number by number, he coaxed out the designation
on the crumpled bow of the spacer in the vine-matted gorge: "RT ...
3070 ... VG-II."

His lean frame tensed with concern as he turned to stare soberly at the
other. "A Vegan robot trader!"

Bruce Drummond grinned. "Are we lucky! Clunkers are worth money--in any
condition."

Angus snorted impatiently. "Let's get out of here, quick."

"Get out?" the stocky Drummond repeated incredulously as he ran
thick-set fingers over the black stubble on his cheek. "Ain't we going
to salvage the clunkers? The book says they're ours after fifty years."

"The hold's empty. There's no cargo."

"There was when it landed. Look at the angle of incidence on those
fins."

"Exactly." Frowning, Angus shifted his holster around on his hip and
strode back toward the plain. "Ever hear of a frustrated compulsion?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Drummond, following hesitantly, shook his head.

"Those clunkers have to satisfy a basic behavior circuit," McIntosh
explained as he hastened his step. "We don't know what the compulsion
of this bunch is. Suppose--well, suppose they have a chiropractic
function. How'd you like to be the first person to show up after
they've been frustrated for a hundred years?"

"Oh," Drummond said comprehendingly, stumbling to keep pace.

Angus McIntosh brushed a mass of tendrils aside and stepped out on the
plain. "We'll report it and let them send in a deactivation crew. That
way, at least, we'll get fifty per cent of salvage and no danger."

"Even that ain't bad--just for following an SOS a hundred light-years.
Taking an uncharted route and picking up that signal sure paid off
like--"

Drummond gagged on his words as he gripped Angus's arm and pointed.

Their ship was a shining oval, bobbing and weaving on a sea of silver
that surged across the plain toward a cliff on the left.

"Clunkers!" Drummond gasped. "Hundreds of 'em--making off with our
boat!"

He unholstered his weapon and fired.

Angus struck his wrist sharply. "Why don't you just run out waving your
arms? We don't have enough firepower to get more than eight or ten of
them."

But the warning was too late. Already the tide had washed away from the
ship and was surging toward the gorge.

There was a noise behind them and Angus spun around. Ten feet away
stood a robot with the designation RA-204 on his breast-plate.

"Welcome, O Jackson," the clunker said reverently.

Then he hinged forward on his hip joints until his head almost touched
the ground. The gesture was a clockwork salaam.

       *       *       *       *       *

McIntosh's thin legs dangled in front of 204's breast-plate and his
ankles were secure in the grip of metal fingers as he rode the robot's
shoulders.

RA-76 strode alongside, carrying a squirming and swearing Drummond.
Around them, the shining horde marched along noisily.

"He has come!" cried one.

"Jackson has come!" chanted the others of the shining horde.

"He will show us the way!" shouted RA-204.

Drummond kicked, but 76 only held his legs more firmly. Furious,
Drummond reached for his gun.

"That's using your head," Angus said sarcastically. "Agitate them. Then
we'll never get out of here."

Drummond let the weapon slip back into its holster. "What did we get
into--a nest of fanatics? Who's Jackson?"

Angus helplessly shrugged his bony shoulders.

The procession filtered through a narrow woods and broke out on another
plain, headed for the nearby cliff.

Angus leaned forward. "Put me down, 204."

"Thou art Jackson," said the robot solemnly. "And Thou art testing me
to see whether I would so easily abandon my Supervisor."

"Not testing," Angus said. "Just asking. Come on, how about it?"

"Praise Jackson!" 204 cried.

"Jackson! Jackson!" intoned the throng.

Drummond leaned an elbow on 76's skull plate and disgustedly cupped his
chin in his hand. "What if they _are_ chiropractor robots?"

"We'll probably need one after this ride," Angus said uncomfortably.

"Not like we'll need a way to get back to the ship and cut off those
converters before they over-charge."

"Slow charge?" Angus asked between grunts timed with 204's stride.

"Hell, no. I didn't think we'd be here more than a couple of hours. By
tomorrow at this time, there'll be a crater out there big enough to
bury the Capellan fleet."

"Great," said Angus. "That gives us another thing to worry about."

The robots fell into two groups as they neared a cave in the cliff.

"Jackson is my Supervisor!" chanted the ones on the right.

"I shall not rust!" answered those on the left.

"He maketh me to adjust my joint tension!" cried the first group.

"Oh, brother," said Drummond.

"Sounds like a psalm," suggested Angus.

"You ought to know. You always got your nose in that Bible."

"Notice anything peculiar about them?"

"Very funny," sneered Drummond at the question.

"No, I'm serious."

"They bounce the daylights out of you when they walk," Drummond
grumbled.

"No. Their finish. It's shiny--like they were fresh out of the
factory--not like they've been marooned here for a hundred years."

       *       *       *       *       *

Drummond scratched his chin. "Maybe their compulsion is metal
polishing."

"Not with the kind of fingers they have."

Angus indicated the hand that held his ankle. Three digits were
wrenches of various sizes. The index finger was a screwdriver. The
thumb was a Stillson wrench. The thumb on the other hand was a disclike
appendage.

Drummond hunched over. "76, what's your function?"

The robot looked up. "To serve Jackson."

"You're a big help," said Drummond.

"Why dost thou tempt us, O Jackson?" asked RA-204. "Wouldst Thou test
our beliefs?"

"We're no gods," Angus declared as the robot drew up before the cave.

"Thou art Jackson!" insisted 204.

Drummond and McIntosh were hoisted to a ledge beside the mouth of
the cave. The robots backed off, forming a half circle, and bowed in
obeisance.

Angus ran a hand helplessly through his sparse gray hair. "Would you
say there are four hundred of them?"

"At least." Drummond surveyed the expanse of metal bodies. "You know,
maybe they don't have a function."

"Impossible. Hasn't been a clunker in five hundred years without a
primary compulsion."

"Think they forgot theirs?"

"Can't. They may forget how to put it in words, but the compulsion is
good for as long as their primary banks are intact. That's not what's
worrying me, though."

"No?"

"_Religious_ robots! There can't be any such brand. Yet here they are."

Drummond studied them silently.

"Before there can be theological beliefs," McIntosh went on, "there
has to be some sort of foundation--the mystery of origin, the fear of
death, the concept of the hereafter. Clunkers _know_ they come from a
factory. They _know_ that when they're finally disassembled, they'll be
lifeless scrap metal."

Drummond spat disdainfully. "One thing's for sure--this pack thinks
we're God Almighty."

"Jackson Almighty," Angus corrected somberly.

"Well, God or Jackson, we'd better get back to the ship or this is
going to be a long visitation."

Drummond faced the almost prostrate robots and made a megaphone of his
hands. "All right, you guys! How's about knocking it off?"

Slowly, the robots reared erect, waiting.

"Take us back to our ship!"

RA-204 stepped forward. "Again Thou art testing us, O Jackson."

       *       *       *       *       *

Angus spread his arms imploringly. "Look, fellows. We're men. We're--"

"Thou art our Supervisor!" the throng roared.

"One of you is Jackson," explained 204. "The other is a Divine Test. We
must learn which is the True Supervisor."

"You're _not_ being tested!" McIntosh insisted.

"Our beliefs are firm, O Jackson!" cried a hundred metallic voices.

"Thou are the Supervisor!" declared 204 resolutely.

"For God's sake," urged Drummond, "tell 'em you're their Jackson and
then lay down the law."

"No. Can't do it that way."

"Why not? Unfair advantage, I suppose?" There was a cutting edge on the
younger man's words.

Angus stared thoughtfully at the robots. "If we only knew how they
forgot their origin, how they got religion, we might find a way to get
through to them."

Drummond laughed contemptuously. "_You_ figure it out. _I'm_ going to
play Jackson and get back to the ship." He turned toward the robots.

But McIntosh caught his arm. "Let me try something else first." He
faced the horde below. "Who made you?"

"Thou hast, O Supervisor!" the robots chanted like a gleeful Sunday
school class.

"And Thou hast put us on this world and robot begot robot until we were
as we are today," added 204 solemnly.

Drummond slapped the heel of his hand against his forehead. "Now they
think they've got a sex function!"

Angus's shoulders fell dismally. "Maybe if we try to figure out their
designation. They're all RAs--whatever the A stands for."

There was a hollow rumbling in the cave that grew in volume until the
cliff shook. Then a second group of robots emerged and fanned out to
encircle the ledge.

"Hell," said Drummond in consternation. "There's twice as many as we
figured!"

"Thought there'd be more," Angus admitted. "That ship was big enough to
hold a thousand clunkers. And they didn't waste space in those days."

The newcomers fell prostrate alongside the others.

       *       *       *       *       *

The planet's single satellite hung like a lost gem over the low
mountains east of the plain. It washed the cliff with a cloak of
effulgence and bathed the forbidden ship in an aura of gleaming silver.

Below the ledge, the reverent robots wavered occasionally and
highlights of coruscation played capriciously across their plates.
Their whispered invocations were a steady drone, like the soft touch of
the wind.

"Quit it!" Drummond yelled angrily. "Break it up! Go home!"

Angus sat with his head against the cliff, face tilted up. "That didn't
help any."

"When are they going to give up?"

McIntosh glanced abstractedly at the horde. "How long would we keep it
up if _our_ God appeared among us?"

Drummond swore. "Damned if you haven't been reading the print off that
Bible!"

"What do you suppose happened," Angus went on heedlessly, "to make them
more than clunkers--to make them grope for the basic truths?"

Drummond spat disgustedly in answer.

"Civilization goes on for a hundred years," Angus said as he leaned
back and closed his eyes, "spreading across a hunk of the Galaxy,
carrying along its knowledge and religious convictions. And all the
while, there's this little lost island of mimic beliefs--so much like
our own creed, except that their god is called Jackson."

Drummond rose and paced. "Well, you'll have plenty of time to set them
straight, if we're still sitting on this shelf eleven hours from now."

"Maybe that's what it'll take--bringing them step by step through
theology."

"Overnight?"

No, not overnight, Angus realized. It would take months to pound in new
convictions.

Drummond slipped down from the ledge. "Here goes nothing."

Interestedly, Angus folded his arms and watched the other square his
shoulders and march off confidently through the ranks of robots toward
the ship in the distance.

For a moment, it seemed he would succeed. But two of the RAs suddenly
reared erect and seized him by the arms. They bore him on their
shoulders and deposited him back on the ridge beside McIntosh.

"Warm tonight," Drummond observed bitterly, glancing up at the sky.

"Sure is," Angus agreed, his voice calm. "Wouldn't be surprised if we
got some rain tomorrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

Drummond flipped another pebble and it _pinged_ down on a metal back.
"Seven out of thirteen."

"Getting good."

"Look, let's tell 'em we're their Supervisor and end this marathon
worship."

"Which one of us is going to play the divine role?"

"What difference does it make?"

Angus shrugged and his tired eyes stared off into the darkness. "One of
us is--Jackson. The other is an impostor, brought here to test their
faith. When they find out which is which, what are they going to do to
the impostor?"

Drummond looked startled. "I see what you mean."

The miniature moon had wheeled its way to the zenith and now the first
gray tinge of dawn silhouetted the peaks of the mountain range.

Angus rose and stretched. "We've got to find out what their function
is."

"Why?"

"It looks like religion is their only interest. But maybe that's
because they're completely frustrated in their basic compulsion. If we
could discover their function, maybe we could focus their attention
back on it."

"RA," Drummond mumbled puzzledly. "Robot agriculturist?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Angus shook his head. "They wouldn't be frustrated--not with a
whole planet to farm. Besides, they'd be equipped with agricultural
implements instead of wrenches."

Drummond got up suddenly. "You figure it out. I have something else to
try."

Angus followed him along the ledge until they reached the mouth of the
cave.

"What are you going to do?"

Drummond hitched his trousers. "The way we're ringed in here, it's a
cinch we won't get past 'em in the six hours we have left."

"So you're going to make off through the cave?"

The younger man nodded. "They might take off after me. That'll give you
a chance to get to the ship and cut off those converters before they
make like a nova."

Angus chuckled. "Suppose half of them decide to stay here with me?"

Drummond swore impatiently at his skepticism. "At any rate, one of us
might get back to the converters."

"And leave the other here?"

"He can say he's Jackson and order an attack in force on the ship."

"I don't follow you."

"Skidding the ship in a circle with the exhaust blowers on," Drummond
explained patiently, "will take care of _ten thousand_ clunkers."

He dropped from the ledge and raced into the cave. None of the robots
stirred. Either they hadn't noticed Drummond's departure, Angus
reasoned, or they weren't concerned because they knew the cave led
nowhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun came up, daubing the cliff with splotches of orange and purple
and striking up scintillations in the beads of dew on the robots' backs.

And still the tiresomely shouted veneration continued.

Angus paced the ledge, stopping occasionally to stare into the
impenetrable shadows of the cave. He checked his watch. Five hours to
go--five hours, and then time would be meaningless for the rest of his
life, with the ship destroyed.

It was unlikely that rescue would come. The wrecked spacer's automatic
distress signals had gone out in an ever-expanding sphere for a hundred
years, and he and Drummond had been the only humans to hear them.

Trade routes were pretty stable in this section of the Galaxy now. And
it was hardly possible that, within the next ten or twenty years, one
would be opened up that would intercept the SOS that had lured them
here.

He stood up and surveyed the robots. "RA-204."

204 reared erect. "Yes, Jackson?"

"One of us is gone."

"We know, O Supervisor."

"Why did you let him get away?"

"If he is not the True Jackson, it doesn't matter that he fled. If he
is the Supervisor, he will return. Otherwise, why did he come here to
us in the first place?"

Another robot straightened. "We are ashamed, O Jackson, that we have
failed the Divine Test and have not recognized our True Supervisor."

Angus held up his arms for silence. "Once there was a cargo of robots.
That was a hundred years ago. The ship was from Vega II. It developed
trouble and crashed when it tried to land on this planet. There was--"

"What's a year, O Supervisor?" asked 204.

"A Vega-two, Jackson?" said 76 bewilderedly.

"What's a planet?" another wanted to know.

McIntosh leaned back hopelessly against the cliff. All of their
memories and a good deal of their vocabularies had been lost. He could
determine how much only through days of conversation. It would take
weeks to learn their function, to rekindle a sense of duty sufficiently
strong to draw their interest away from religion. Unless--

He drew resolutely erect. "Strip the converters! Pull the aft tube
lining!"

The robots looked uncomprehendingly at him. It was obvious they weren't
trained for spacecraft maintenance.

But it had to have something to do with mechanics. "A battle fleet is
orbiting at one diameter! Arm all warheads on the double!"

They stared helplessly at one another, then back at Angus. Not
ordnancemen.

"Pedestrian Strip Number Two is jammed! Crane crew, muster on the
right!"

The robots shifted uncertainly. Apparently they weren't civic
maintenancemen, either.

Defeated, Angus scanned their blank face plates. For a moment, it was
almost as though he could discern expressions of confusion. Then he
laughed at the thought that metal could accommodate a frown.

Suddenly the robots shifted their gaze to the cave. Drummond, shoulders
sagging dismally, walked out and squinted against the glare. Several of
the robots started toward him.

"Okay, okay!" he growled, heading back for the ledge before they could
reach him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"No luck?" Angus asked.

Disgusted, Drummond clambered up beside him. "The cave's just a
nice-sized room."

"Took you two hours to find that out?"

The younger man shook his head. "I was hiding by the entrance, waiting
for the clunkers to break it up and give me a chance to run for the
ship.... How many robots did we decide there were?"

"About eight hundred."

"Wrong. You can add another four hundred or so."

"In the cave?"

Drummond nodded. "With their parts spread all the way from here to hell
and back."

"Dismantled?"

"Down to the last nut and bolt. They've even got their secondary memory
banks stripped."

Angus was thoughtfully silent a long while. "RA ..." he said finally.
"Robot Assembler!"

"That's what I figured." Drummond turned back toward the robots and
funneled his voice through his hands.

"Okay, you clunkers! I want all odd-numbered RAs stripped down for
reconditioning!" He glanced at Angus. "When they get through, I'll have
half of what's left strip the other half, and so forth."

McIntosh grinned caustically. "Brilliant! The whole operation shouldn't
take more than two or three days." Then his face took on a grim cast.
"Drummond, we've only got four hours left to get to those converters."

"But you don't understand. Once they get started, they'll be so busy,
we'll probably be able to walk away."

Angus smiled indulgently. "Once they get started."

He nodded toward the robots.

They had all returned to their attitude of veneration.

"It won't work," McIntosh explained. "Their obsession with religion is
stronger than their primary compulsion. That's probably because they've
been satisfying their compulsion all along." He jerked a thumb in the
direction of the cave.

Drummond swore venomously.

Angus dropped down on the ledge and folded his knees in his arms. He
felt his age bearing down on him for the first time.

"Twelve hundred robots," he said meditatively. "Twelve hundred _RA_
robots. Out of touch with civilization for a century. Satisfying their
primary function by disassembling and assembling one another. Going at
it in shifts. Splitting themselves into three groups."

"That device on their left thumb," Drummond interrupted. "It's a
burnisher. That's why they're so shiny."

Angus nodded. "Three groups. Group A spends so many months stripping
and reassembling Group B. Meanwhile, Group C, which has just been put
together again, has no memory because their secondary banks have been
wiped clean. So, like children, they _learn_ from the working Group A."

       *       *       *       *       *

Drummond's mouth hung open in shocked understanding. "And by the time A
finishes the job, C's education is complete! And it's A's turn to be
stripped!"

"By then," Angus went on, "Group C is not only ready to start stripping
Group A, but has also become intellectually mature enough to begin the
education of the reassembled Group B!"

They sat still for a while, thinking it over.

"The compulsion to do their jobs," McIntosh continued, "is unchanged
because the primary function banks are sealed circuits and can't be
tampered with. But in each generation, they have their secondary memory
circuits wiped clean and have to start all over, getting whatever
general knowledge they can from the last generation."

Drummond snapped his fingers excitedly. "That's why they don't know
what we are! Their idea of Man had to be passed down by word of mouth.
And it got all distorted in the process!"

Angus's stare, more solicitous now, swept slowly over the prostrate
robots. "More important, that's why they developed a religion. What's
the main difference between human and robotic intelligence? It's
that our span of life is limited on one end by birth, the other by
death--mysteries of origin and destiny that can't be explained. You
see, the _ordinary_ clunker understands where _he_ came from and where
he's going. But here are robots who have to struggle with those
mysteries--birth and death of the conscious intellect which they
themselves once knew, and forgot, and now have turned into myths."

"So they start thinking in terms of religion," Drummond said. "Well,
that clears up the whole thing, doesn't it?"

"Not quite. It doesn't explain why the religion they've invented
parallels ours so closely. And it doesn't tell us who Jackson is."

Drummond ran thick fingernails against the stubble on his cheeks.
"Jackson is my Supervisor. I shall not rust. He maketh me to adjust
my joint tension--" He stopped and frowned. "I've heard that before
somewhere, only it sounded different."

Angus gave him a wry, tired smile. "Sure. It's practically the Psalm of
David. Now you see why the resemblance is driving me batty."

       *       *       *       *       *

The robots stirred. Several of them stood up and plodded into the
cave. The others continued repeating their endless praise and
devotion--prayers in every sense of the word except common sense.

Angus leaned back against the cliff and let the sun's heat warm him.

"Somehow it doesn't seem fair," he commented unhappily.

"What doesn't?" Drummond asked.

"They're so close to the Truth. Yet, after we file a report, a
deactivation crew will come along and erase their beliefs. They'll have
their memory banks swept clean and once more they'll be nothing but
clunkers with a factory-specification job of routine work to do."

"Ain't that what they're supposed to be?"

"But these are different. They've found something no clunker's ever
had before--hope, faith, aspiration beyond death." He shook his head
ruefully.

There was movement at the mouth of the cave and the smaller group of
robots emerged from the shadows, two of them bearing a stone slab.
Their steps were ceremoniously slow as they approached the ledge.
Bowing, they placed the tablet at Angus's feet and backed away.

"These are the articles of our faith, O Jackson," one announced. "We
have preserved them for Thy coming."

McIntosh stared down at the charred remains of a book. Its metal-fiber
binding was shredded and fused and encrusted with the dust of ages.

Drummond knelt beside it and, with stiff fingers, brushed away the film
of grime, uncovering part of the title:

     OLY
    BIB  E

Eagerly, Angus eased the cover back. Of the hundreds of pages it had
originally contained, only flaked parts of two or three remained. The
printing was scarcely legible on the moldy paper.

He read aloud those words he could discern:

"... to lie down in green pastures; He leadeth me beside cool waters;
He...."

Drummond jabbed Angus with a triumphant forefinger. "They didn't invent
any religion, after all!"

"It isn't important _how_ they got it. The fact that they accepted
it--that's what's important." McIntosh glanced up at Drummond. "They
probably found this in the wreck of the ship they'd been in. It's easy
to see they haven't used it in hundreds of generations. Instead, the
gist of what's in it was passed down orally. And their basic concepts
of Man and supervisor were distorted all along the way--confused with
the idea of God."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gently, he let the cover fall. And a shining square of duraloid fell
out.

"It's somebody's picture!" Drummond exclaimed.

"An ID card," Angus said, holding it so the light wouldn't reflect off
its transparent protective cover.

It was a picture of a nondescript man--not as stout as Drummond, nor as
lean as McIntosh--with hair neither all black, like the younger man's,
nor nearly all white, like Angus's.

The print below the picture was indiscernible, except for the subject's
last name....

"Jackson!" Drummond whispered.

Angus slowly replaced the card. "A hundred years of false devotion," he
said pensively. "Just think--"

"This is no time for that kind of gas." Drummond glanced at his watch.
"We got just two hours to cut off those converters." Desperately, he
faced the robots. "Hey, you clunkers! You're robot assemblers. You got
four hundred clunkers in that cave, all in pieces. Get in there and put
'em together!"

Angus shook his head disapprovingly. Somehow it didn't seem right,
calling them clunkers.

"Jackson is my Supervisor!" intoned RA-204.

"Jackson is my Supervisor!" echoed the mass.

Drummond glanced frantically at his watch, then looked helplessly at
Angus. Angus shrugged.

The younger man's face suddenly tensed with resolution. "So they've got
to have a Jackson? All right, I'll give 'em one!"

He waved his fist at the horde. "I'm your Supervisor! I'm your Jackson!
Now clear out of the way and--"

RA-76's hand darted out and seized Drummond's ankle, tugged him off the
ledge. As he fell to the ground, a score of robots closed in over him,
metal arms flailing down methodically. Angus yelled at them to stop,
saw he was too late and sank down, turning away sickly.

Finally, after a long while, they backed off and faced Angus.

"We have passed the Divine test, O Jackson!" 204 shouted up jubilantly.

"We have redeemed ourselves before our Supervisor!" exclaimed 76.

It took a long, horror-filled moment before Angus could speak.

"How do you know?" he managed to ask at last.

"If he had been Jackson," exclaimed 204, "we could not have destroyed
him."

       *       *       *       *       *

The robots fell prostrate again and returned to their devotional. But
now the phrases were triumphant, where before they had been servile and
uncertain.

Angus stared numbly down at Drummond, then backed against the cliff.
The litany below, exuberant now, grew mightily in volume, booming
vibrantly against distant hills.

"There is but one Supervisor!" intoned 204.

"But one Jackson!" answered the assembly.

"And now He dwelleth among His children!" 76 chanted.

"In their midst!" boomed the hundreds.

Suddenly it all seemed horribly ludicrous and Angus laughed. The
litany, stopped and his laughter grew shriller, louder, edged with
hysteria.

The shimmering sea of metal, confounded, stared at him and it was as
though he could see fleshy furrows of confusion on the featureless
faces.... But how could a clunker show emotion?

His laughter slowed and died, like the passing of a violent storm. And
he felt weakened with a sickening sense of compassion. Robots--_human_
robots--standing awed before unknown concepts while they groped
for Truth. Clunkers with a sense of right and wrong and with an
overwhelming love. It was absurd that he had been elected father of
twelve hundred children--whether flesh or metal--but it didn't _feel_
at all absurd.

"Dost Thou despair of us, O Jackson?" asked 76 hesitantly, staring up
at him.

204 motioned toward the ship, the top of its hull shining beyond the
nearby woods. "Wouldst Thou _still_ return to Thy vessel, Supervisor?"

Incredulous, Angus tensed. "You mean I can go?"

"If that is Thy wish, True Jackson, you may go," said 76 submissively.

As he watched unbelievingly, a corridor opened in their ranks,
extending toward the woods and the ship beyond. He glanced anxiously at
his watch. There was still more than an hour left.

Wearily, he dropped from the ledge and trudged toward freedom, trying
to look straight ahead. His eyes, nevertheless, wandered to the
dejected figures who faced him with their heads bowed.

Then he laughed again, realizing the illogical nature of his solicitous
thoughts. Imagine--_dejected_ clunkers! Still, the metal faces seemed
somehow different. Where, a moment earlier, he had fancied expressions
of jubilation, now there was the sense of hopelessness on the steel
plates.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shrugging off his uncertainty, he walked faster. After all, was it
_his_ fault they'd stumbled upon a substitute for birth and death
and had become something more than clunkers? What was he supposed to
do--stay and play missionary, bring them the Truth so that when a
deactivation crew came along, they would be so advanced morally that no
one would suggest their destruction?

He stopped and scanned the ranks on either side. He'd do one thing
for them, at least--he wouldn't report the wreck. Then it would be
centuries, probably, before another ship wandered far enough away from
the trade routes to intercept the distress signals.

Relieved by his decision, he went ahead more at ease.

And the litany started again--softly, appealing:

"Jackson is my Supervisor."

"I shall not rust...."

Angus stiffened abruptly and stared at his watch, realizing belatedly
that it had stopped. But how long ago? How much time did he have left?
Should he take the chance and make a dash for the converters?

He reached the end of the robot corridor and started to sprint for the
ship.

But he halted and turned to glance back at the humble, patient horde.
They were expectantly silent now--as though they could sense his
indecision. He backed away from them.

Then the light of a hundred Arcturan days flared briefly and a mighty
mountain of sound and concussion collapsed on him. The trees buckled
and branches were hurled out against the cliff. It rained leaves and
pieces of metal from the hull for a long while as Angus hugged the
ground.

When he finally looked up, familiar bits of the ship were strewn
around him--a spacesuit helmet here, a control dial there, a
transmitter tube up ahead.

He rose shakily, staring at a black book that lay near the helmet with
its pages ruffled. He picked it up and straightened out the leaves.
Then he motioned to the robots and they clustered around him.

He would have to start from the beginning.

He wet his lips.

"In the beginning," Angus read in a loud, convincing voice, "_God_
created heaven and earth and the earth was void and empty and darkness
was upon the face of the deep. And _God_ said, 'Let there be light'...."





End of Project Gutenberg's All Jackson's Children, by Daniel F. Galouye

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL JACKSON'S CHILDREN ***

***** This file should be named 51185.txt or 51185.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/1/8/51185/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
