Project Gutenberg's A Desperate Chance, by Old Sleuth (Harlan P. Halsey)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Desperate Chance
       The Wizard Tramp's Revelation, A Thrilling Narrative

Author: Old Sleuth (Harlan P. Halsey)

Release Date: January 12, 2004 [EBook #10690]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DESPERATE CHANCE ***




Produced by Steven desJardins and PG Distributed Proofreaders




A DESPERATE CHANCE:

OR

THE WIZARD TRAMP'S REVELATION,

A Thrilling Narrative.

By OLD SLEUTH.

[Illustration: "He Placed the Ladder of Saplings Across the Abyss."]

1897




CHAPTER I.

THE CAMPFIRE IN THE GULCH--AN ALARM--THE SOLITARY
FIGURE--UNDER COVER--A WHITE MAN--"HAIL,
FRIEND!"--A CORDIAL MEETING--A SECOND STRANGE
CHARACTER.


"Well, Desmond, we've taken a desperate chance, and so far appear to be
losers."

The circumstances under which the words above quoted were spoken were
weird and strange. A man and a mere youth were sitting by a campfire
that was blazing and crackling in a narrow gulch far away in the Rocky
Mountains, days and days travel from civilization.

The circumstances that had brought them there were also very strange and
unusual. Desmond Dare was the son of a widow who owned a small farm in
New York State. There had been a mortgage on this farm which was about
to be foreclosed when Desmond, a brave, vigorous lad, sold his only
possession, a valuable colt, and determined to enter a walking match for
the prize. He was on his way to the city where the match was to take
place when in a belt of woods he heard a cry for help. He ran in the
direction whence the cry came and found three tramps assailing a fourth
man. The vigorous youth sprang to the rescue and drove the three tramps
off, and was later persuaded by the man he had rescued to go with him to
a rock cavern. There the lad beheld a very beautiful girl of about
fourteen whose history was enveloped in a dark mystery; he also learned
that the man he had rescued was known as the wizard tramp. The latter
was a very strange and peculiar character, a victim of the rum habit,
which had brought him away down until he became a tramp of the most
pronounced type. This man, however, was really a very shrewd fellow,
well educated, not only in book learning, but in the ways of the world,
and seeing that Desmond had resolved to take a desperate chance, the
tramp volunteered to land him a winner; he succeeded in so doing. The
champion of the walking match carried his money to his mother, the tramp
went upon an extended spree and spent his share. Afterward the tramp and
Desmond Dare started on the road together. The girl had been placed with
Mrs. Dare on the farm, and the man and boy proceeded West afoot,
determined to locate a gold mine. The former discovered each day some
new quality, and held forth to Desmond that some day he would make a
very startling revelation. The youth had no idea as to the character of
the revelation, but knowing that the tramp, named Brooks, was a very
remarkable man, he anticipated a very startling denouement. After many
very strange and exciting adventures Brooks, the tramp, and Desmond Dare
arrived in the Rockies, and in due time started in to find their gold
mine. The previous history of these two remarkable characters can be
read in Nos. 90 and 91 of "OLD SLEUTH'S OWN."

At the time we introduce the tramp and Desmond Dare to our readers in
this narrative, they had been knocking around the mountains in search of
their mine and had met with failures on every side, and at length one
night they camped in the gulch as described in our opening paragraphs,
and Brooks spoke the words with which we open our narrative.

They were sitting beside their fire; both were partly attired as hunters
and mountaineers, and both were well armed. Brooks, who had practically
been a bloat had lived a temperate life, had enjoyed plenty of exercise
in the open air, and had experienced to a certain extent a return of his
original physical strength and vigor. At the time the whilom tramp made
the disconsolate remark quoted, Desmond asked:

"What do you propose to do--give it up?"

"I don't know just what to do, lad."

"We've scraped together a little gold dust; possibly we may have money
enough to engage in some legitimate business, and what we can't get by
the discovery of a mine, we may acquire in time in speculation. You are
shrewd and level-headed."

"That would be a good scheme for you, lad, but not for me. I am too far
advanced in life to earn money by slow labor now. What I propose is that
you go back, take all the gold we have, and enter into trade; you are
bright and energetic and may succeed."

"And what will you do?"

"I shall continue my search for a mine, and some day I may strike it."

Brooks was a college graduate, a civil engineer, and a mineralogist, and
believed he had great advantages in searching for a mine, but, as has
been indicated, thus far their tramp and search had been a dead failure.

"I'll stick with you," said Desmond.

"No, lad, you must go back."

"I swear I will not; I like this life, and remember, we have gathered
some wash dust and we may gather more. I don't know the value of what we
have gathered from the bottom of that stream we struck, but I do know
that it would take a long time to accumulate as much money in trade.
Remember, we have been in the mountains only six weeks."

"That is all right, but we might stay here six years and not make a
find."

At that instant there came a sound which caused Brooks and Desmond to
bend their ears and listen. Some of the Indians were on the warpath; a
band of bucks had been making a raid and had been pursued by the United
States cavalry into the mountains. Indians, as a rule, do not take to
the mountains, but sometimes when pursued hotly they will separate into
small bands and scatter through the hills; these fellows are dangerous.
They would have murdered any white men they might meet for their arms
alone, without considering the spirit of wantonness or revenge that
might animate them.

Brooks and Desmond rose from their seats beside the fire and moved
slowly away. At any moment an arrow or even a rifle shot might come and
end the life of one or both.

Desmond had become a very expert woodsman; he and Brooks had been
chased by Indians several times and had exchanged shots with one band.
They knew a cover in a crevice in the wall of rock which ran up abruptly
each side of the gulch; from this spot they could survey and also make a
good fight in an emergency. They had good weapons, plenty of ammunition,
and what was more, coolness, skill, and courage. Desmond, especially,
was a very cool-headed chap in times of danger; the use of firearms was
not new to him, nor was the woodsman life altogether a novelty, for he
had been raised in a very wild and desolate mountain region.

Quickly they stole to cover, although they believed it possible that
they might have been seen, for they had absolute proof, well known to
woodsmen, that if there were foes in the vicinity they had been
discovered. Once in their covert they lay low, and a few moments passed,
when they beheld a solitary figure advancing slowly and very cautiously
up the gulch, and as the figure came in the light of the fire Desmond,
whose eyesight was very keen, said:

"It's a white man; he looks like a hunter; we will wait a moment or two,
but I guess it is all right."

The figure, meantime, with rifle poised, advanced very slowly and
finally stood fully revealed close to the fire, and indeed he was a
white man of strong and vigorous frame.

"I'll go and meet him," said Desmond; "you lay low here, rifle in hand
ready to shoot in case he proves an enemy."

"All right, lad, go ahead."

Desmond stepped from his hiding-place and advanced toward the fire. The
stranger saw him, still held his position ready for offense or defense,
and permitted Desmond to approach, and soon he discerned that the lad
was a white man and he called:

"Hail, friend!"

"Hail, to you," replied the lad.

The two men approached and shook hands. The hunter was a splendid
specimen of physical manhood, and his face indicated honesty and
good-nature.

"Are you alone here, lad?"

"No."

"Where's your comrade?"

Desmond made a sign, and Brooks stepped forth from the crevice and
approached the fire.

"Hail, friend," said the stranger hunter.

Brooks answered the salutation, the two men shook hands and the stranger
said;

"What may be your business out here?"

"We'll talk of that later on; but, stranger, you took great chances."

"I did?"

"Yes."

"How?"

"In approaching the fire you were exposed; suppose the fire had been
kindled by Indians?"

The woodsman laughed, and said:

"I knew it was not an Indian's fire."

"You did?"

"Yes."

"How is that?"

"They don't create such a big blaze. I knew white men were around, and
men whom I need not fear, but I was on my guard all the same."

"We could have dropped you off."

"Well, yes, but out here we have to take chances, and it was necessary
for me to do so."

"It was?"

"Yes."

"How so?"

"I need food; I have not struck any game lately. The fact is, I've been
up in the peaks where there is no game. I hope you have a cold snack
here, my friends, and some tobacco, for I have not had a regular tobacco
smoke or chew for over a month."

"We were just about to prepare some coffee and make a meal."

"Good enough; did you say coffee? Well, I have struck Elysium; I haven't
tasted a cup of coffee in a year. You see I was snowbound away up in the
mountains; fortunately I had plenty of dried meat, and I was compelled
to wait until I was thawed out."

Brooks commenced making the coffee, and while doing so the woodsman
asked:

"Are you regular hunters?"

"No."

"Ever in the mountains before?"

"Never."

"You've been taking great chances."

"We have?"

"Yes."

"How so?"

"The mountains are full of bad Indian fugitives, and they are very ugly.
Some are parts of a raiding gang of bucks, and others are rascals who
have made a kick out at the reservation. I've met twenty of them in the
last ten days; they are in squads of twos and threes, and they are full
of fight."

"We have met some of them."

"And you managed to escape?"

"We had a fight with one party."

"You did?"

"Yes."

"How did you come out?"

"Ahead, I reckon, or we would not be here."

The conversation was between the woodsman and Desmond.

"What brought you into the mountains--are you tourists?"

"No."

"On business?"

"Yes."

"Surveyors?"

"No."

"I thought not; no use to survey out this way. I suppose you are looking
for a lost mine."

"Well, we might take in a lost mine or find a new one, it don't matter."

"Ah! I see; well, so far you've been lucky, but you've been taking
desperate chances."

"Oh! that's a way we have."




CHAPTER II.

A RECOGNITION--THE WOODSMAN'S DISCLOSURES--A
CHANCE AFTER ALL--THE BIVOUAC--DESMOND'S
DISCOVERY--SAVAGES GALORE.


The coffee was soon prepared and Brooks produced some dried meat and a
few crackers, and the three men, so strangely met, sat down to enjoy
their meal. The woodsman was offered the first cup of coffee, and as he
drank it down, all hot and steaming, he smacked his lips and exclaimed:

"Well, that was good; that cup of coffee makes us friends. I may do you
a good turn."

"Good enough; we are ready for a good turn. We've had rather hard luck
so far."

"So you are after a mine, eh?"

"Yes."

"You are regular prospectors?"

"Yes."

"You have to strike a surface ledge to make any money. Don't think a
claim would amount to much out here unless you found a nest of them so
as to attract a crowd, and a town, and a mill, and all that. According
to my idea the mines out here all need capital to work 'em in case you
should strike one."

Regardless of possibilities, as the night was a little chilly, Brooks
had created quite a blaze, and by the light of the fire he had a fair
chance to study the woodsman's face, and finally he asked abruptly:

"Stranger, what is your name?"

The woodsman laughed, and said:

"I thought you'd ask that question."

"You did?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Well, it's natural that you should, but that ain't the reason I thought
so."

"It is not?"

"No."

"Well, why did you think so?"

"I was going to ask your name."

"Certainly; my name is Brooks."

"I thought so."

"You did?"

"Yes."

"What made you think my name was Brooks?"

"Can't you guess?"

"No."

"Why did you ask my name?"

"As you said, it was a natural question."

"That ain't the reason you asked it."

"It is not?"

"No."

"Well, you may tell me the true reason."

"You've been studying my face."

"I have."

"You think you've seen me before somewhere?"

"Well, you did see me before."

"I did?"

"Yes."

"When and where?"

"Just look sharp and see if you can't place me."

"I can't."

"It was a great many years ago."

"It must have been; but to tell the truth, there is something very
familiar in your face."

"Yes, and you discovered it at the start, but you don't place me; I
placed you. I didn't until you mentioned your name."

"You now recall?"

"I do."

"Where have we met?"

"Try to remember."

"Tell me your name."

"Oh, certainly, by and by; but in the meantime pay me the compliment of
remembering who I am."

"You have the advantage."

"How?"

"I told you my name."

"I will tell you mine in good time, but try to remember."

"I give it up."

"You do?"

"I do."

The woodsman laughed, and said:

"We slept together one night."

"We did?"

"Yes."

"When and where?"

"And now you can't recall?"

"I cannot."

"You are a square man, but there has come a change over you."

"Did we meet often?"

"No."

"Were we intimate?"

"Well, yes, for the time being."

"I give it up."

"You don't place me?"

"No."

Again the woodsman laughed and said:

"Do you remember about fifteen years ago a young fellow, tired, wet, and
hungry, tried to find shelter in a freight car?"

"Hello! you are not Henry Creedon?"

"Yes, I am, and this is the second time you've fed me. You appear to be
my good angel; I may prove your good angel."

"So you are Henry Creedon?"

"I am," and turning to Desmond, Creedon said:

"Your friend there one night made a fight for me, fed me and found
shelter for me. He was a tramp then; I was footing it out West here."

"Henry," said Brooks, "what have you been doing all these years?"

"Mine hunting."

"Mine hunting for fifteen years?"

"Yes."

"And have you found a mine yet?"

The woodsman laughed, and Brooks said:

"Desmond, we did indeed take desperate chances, and we've been making a
fool's chase, I reckon. Here is a man who has been mine hunting for
fifteen years and has not found one yet. Where do we come in?"

"I'll tell you," said Creedon; "it's luck when you find a mine. More are
found by chance than are discovered by experts, but I think I've found
one; I can't tell. You see, I was raised in a factory town, I've had no
education and I can't tell its value. I know where the find is located,
however, and some of these days I'll strike a prospecting party who will
have an engineer with them, and then I will know the value of my find."

"If you take a party in with you they will demand a share."

"Certainly."

"Do you intend to share with them?"

"I can't do otherwise."

"Yes, that is so; suppose I find an engineer for you?"

"I suppose you will want a rake in."

"Certainly."

"Well, Brooks, I'll tell you, I don't want to start in on a divide with
everyone, but I've made up my mind to take you in with me. I know you
are a kind-hearted and honest man, even though you are a tramp, a
whisky-loving tramp, and that I remember you emptied my canister that
night."

"Yes, but I am not drinking now; I've reformed."

"You have?"

"Yes."

"So much the better for you."

"I've something to tell you."

"Go it."

"I am just the man to establish the value of your mine."

"You are?"

"Yes, I am."

"How is that, eh? Have you become an expert after being in the mountains
six weeks? and I am not in one way, and I've been here for fifteen
years."

"I was an expert before I came to the mountains."

"You were?"

"Yes."

"How is that?"

"I am a civil engineer by profession."

"What's that?"

"I am a civil engineer by profession."

"You don't tell me!"

"That's what I tell you, and I tell you the truth."

"Then you are just the man I want."

"I said I was; I am more than an engineer, I am a mineralogist and a
geologist."

"Hold on, don't overcome a fellow out here in the mountains; if you are
a civil engineer that is enough for me. Hang your mineralogy and
geology; what I want is a man who can estimate. No doubt about the ledge
I've struck; the question is, how much will it cost to mine it; how much
is there of it? You see I've had some experience here in the mountains,
and sometimes we strike what is called a pocket; we might find gold for
a few feet one way and another, and then strike dead rock and no gold. I
ain't a mineralogist or geologist or a civil engineer, and I am afraid
my find won't amount to much, but it is worth investigation, and as you
are able to estimate we will make a start. To-morrow I will take you to
my ledge and then we will know whether we are millionaires or
tramps--eh? mountain tramps--but I am grateful for this food and coffee,
and now if you'll give me a little tobacco I'll be the most contented
man in the mountains, whether my mine turns out a hit or a misthrow."

So tobacco was produced; Brooks himself was an inveterate smoker, and
since being in the mountains Desmond had taken to the weed, and there
was promise that some day he might become an inveterate.

The three men had a jolly time, but in a quiet way. Creedon was a good
story teller; he had had many weird experiences in the mountains. He had
acted as guide to a great many parties, he had engaged in about fifty
fights with Indians during his residence in the great West, and had met
a great many very notable characters.

When the men concluded to lie down to sleep for the night they
extinguished their fire, and each man found a crevice into which he
crept, and only those who have slept in the open air in a pure climate
can tell of the exhilarating effects that follow a slumber under the
conditions described.

Desmond was the first to awake, and he peeped forth from his crevice and
glanced down toward the point where the fire had been, when he beheld a
sight that caused his blood to run cold. Five fierce-looking savages
were grouped around the spot where the campfire had been, and he had a
chance to study a scene he had never before witnessed. He beheld five
savages in full war paint; they were dressed in a most grotesque manner,
part of their attire being fragments of United States uniforms, showing
that the red men had been in a skirmish, and possibly had come out
victorious, and had had an opportunity to strip the bodies of the dead.

A great deal has been written about the shrewdness of redmen. They are
shrewd when their qualities are once fully aroused and they are on the
scent, but they are given to assumptions, the same as white men. Of
course Creedon was practically to be credited when he said that the
Indians assumed there had been a camp there and that the campers had
departed, but had they made as close observations as when on a trail
they would have made discoveries that would have suggested the near
presence of the late campers.

Creedon had as far as possible destroyed all signs when raking out the
fire of a recent encampment, but an experienced and alert eye can detect
the truth despite these little tricks.

Desmond saw the Indians: they were a hard-looking lot, the worst
specimens he had ever beheld, and they were assassins at sight, as he
determined. He was secure from observation, but it was necessary to warn
his comrades, who were in different crevices, and at that moment Creedon
actually snored. He was in the crevice adjoining the one where Desmond
had taken refuge.

The Indians were too far away to overhear the snore, but it was possible
the man might awake and step forth; then, as Desmond feared, the fight
would commence. He did not desire a fight; he might think the chances
would be with his party, as only two of the Indians had rifles, but then
if even one of their own party were kicked over it would be a sad
disaster.

The lad meditated some little time and studied the conditions. He
crawled into his crevice, and, lo, he saw a lateral breakaway. He might
gain Creedon's berth, as he called it, without chancing an outside
steal. Fortune favored him; Creedon's crevice was one of several rents
in the rock, and he managed to reach the sleeper's foot, and he
cautiously touched it, fearing at the moment that Creedon in his
surprise might make an outcry or an inquiry in a loud tone, but here he
learned a lesson in woodcraft. Creedon did not make an outcry; he awoke
and cautiously investigated, and soon discovered that Desmond had
touched him and was seeking to communicate with him. He demanded in a
whisper:

"What is it, lad?"

"There are Indians in the gulch."

"Aha! where?"

"Down where we were camped last night."

"You keep low and I will take a peep."

Desmond could afford to let Creedon take a peep. The woodsman did peep
and took in the situation, and he said:

"You are smaller than I am; does the rent where you are run to the berth
where Brooks is sleeping?"

"It may; I will find out and go slow; we don't want a fight if we can
help it, but we've got the dead bulge on those redskins if we have to
fight."




CHAPTER III.

CREEDON'S KNOWLEDGE OF WOODCRAFT--THE REDMEN'S
DEPARTURE--A LONG TRAIL--ON THE TRAMP--THE
STRANGEST REFUGE IN THE WORLD--A BRIDGE OF
RISKS.


Desmond crawled forward beyond the rent where Creedon had lodged, and he
found the space much wider as he progressed, and soon gained the opening
where the rent terminated in which Brooks had lain all night. Desmond
glanced in, and, lo, Brooks was inside awake, and had already discovered
the presence of the Indians, and so far they were all right.

"Have you been able to notify Creedon?" asked Brooks.

"Yes."

"What does he say?"

"He bade me arouse you."

"I discovered the rascals as soon as I awoke."

"All right; lay low and I will learn what Creedon advises."

Desmond crawled back and said:

"Brooks is awake and wants to know what we shall do."

"There is only one thing to do: we will lay low, and if the rascals do
not discover us all right; if they do discover us it will be bad for
them and all right with us again, that's all. And now you and Brooks
just keep out of sight and let me run the show."

Word was passed to Brooks, and Desmond with the tramp lay low. As it
proved there was not much of a show to run, as the Indians moved away
after a little, but Creedon did not permit his friends to go forth. He
said:

"You can never tell about these redskins; they might suspect we are
around, and their going away may be a little trick; they are up to these
tricks."

Hours passed, and Creedon still kept his friends in hiding, and it was
near evening when he stole forth, saying he would take an observation.
After a little he returned and said:

"It's all right; come out."

Creedon said he had discovered evidence that the redskins had really
gone away.

"Why couldn't you have found that out sooner?"

The woodsman laughed and said:

"They might have found me out then; as it was, according to the tales
you and Brooks tell, I took a desperate chance."

"Shall we get to work and have a meal?"

"Not much, young man, you will have to control your appetite for awhile.
Remember, I am captain of this squadron. I'll lead you to a place,
however, where we can build a fire and camp and eat without fear. I am
posted around here; I know the safe places."

The party started on the march, and Desmond felt quite irritated; he had
gone nearly twenty-four hours without eating, and he said:

"I am ready to even fight for a meal."

Creedon laughed and said in reply:

"You may have a stomach full of fighting yet before we find the mine."

"I thought you had located it?"

"Yes, but it's a week's tramp from where we are at present, and we may
have some lively times before we arrive at the place."

It was nine o'clock at night when the party arrived at one of the most
peculiar natural retreats Desmond had ever seen. It was a cave, as we
will call it, in the side wall of a cliff rising from a gulch even more
wild and rugged than the one where the party had camped the previous
night. Some mighty convulsion of the mountain had separated the whole
front of the cliff from the main rock, so that a space of at least
twenty feet intervened, and between yawned a dark abyss that led down to
where no man had yet penetrated. Creedon led the way up along a ledge of
ascent which lined the outer edge of the great mass of detached cliff.
Once at the top he descended on the inner side. It was night, but he had
taken advantage of a mask lantern which he carried with him, and which
he said was the most useful article in his possession. He added:

"These lanterns may belong to the profession of detectives and burglars,
but I've found them the most useful articles a cliff-climber can own.
They are different from other lamps and torches; you can control the one
ray of light and indicate your path without any trouble whatever."

This was true, as the guide demonstrated, and his party walked along
the narrow ledge without any fear of being precipitated over; all it
required was a good eye and a steady nerve, and they possessed these
necessary qualifications.

The guide at length came to a halt, and said:

"You stand here and I'll get my bridge."

He proceeded along alone, but soon returned with two saplings, which he
had strung together, and of which he had made a rope ladder.

Desmond was greatly interested, and watched the guide as he threw his
ladder across the intervening abyss, and then he said:

"It will take a little nerve to crawl over, but once over we are all
safe, and I've got a storehouse over there. I prepared this place with a
great deal of patience and labor. We can spend two or three days here. I
know you will enjoy it, and we can take a good long rest. I will go over
first and then hold the light so you two can follow."

Desmond glanced at Brooks, and asked:

"Will you risk it?"

"Yes, I will, lad; I am not the fellow I was about six months ago; I can
climb a steeple now."

The guide went over, creeping across. The saplings bent under his weight
and made a downward curve, so that when he attempted so ascend on the
opposite side it was a climb up, but with the ropes made of woven
prairie grass and sticks and boughs he easily ascended. He had carried
his lantern with him, and he flashed its light across his bridge and
asked, "Who will come next?"

"You go," said Desmond to Brooks.

The tramp did not hesitate, but started to crawl over the oddly
constructed bridge, and he did so as well as the guide had done. Then
Desmond crossed and the instant all hands were over the guide took up
his bridge stowed it away, and said:

"When we cross back it will be in the daytime, and much harder."

"Much harder in the daytime?"

"Yes."

"I should think it would be easier."

The guide laughed and said:

"It might appear so, but in the daytime you will realize just what you
are doing. You will see the dark abyss beneath you, and when the bridge
sways downward your heart will be in your throat, I tell you. At night,
however, you do not know just what you are doing."

Desmond saw the truth of what the guide said, and observed that the man
was quite a philosopher.

"Now let me go in advance," said Creedon.

He led the way and soon turned into what he called Creedon Street. It
was a broad opening with a solid flooring, and walls of rock on either
side--the most singular and remarkable rock conformation that either
Brooks or Desmond had ever seen. The guide walked right ahead boldly; he
evidently knew that there were no rents down which they might plunge.

"Here is Creedon Hall," said the guide, as he turned into a broad
opening and flashed his light around. The party were in a cave, and yet
we can hardly call it a cave; it appeared to be merely a huge underline
in the side of the cliff, as it was open, as the guide said, facing
Creedon Street.

"I will soon have Creedon Hall illuminated for you," said the guide. He
secured some wood, and as Desmond followed him he saw that he had
abundance of it, and the guide said:

"This wood, some of it, has been stowed here for over ten years, and we
can have a jolly fire in a few minutes, and no fear of attracting
Indians or any one else. We are as safe here as though we were making a
grate fire in a big hotel in New York."

Creedon made good his word, and soon Creedon Hall was brilliantly
illuminated, and Desmond was delighted. He exclaimed in his enthusiasm.

"This is just immense!"

"Well, it is."

Brooks also was delighted; he set to work to make the coffee and prepare
the meal, and Creedon lay down on his blanket and lit his pipe, while
Desmond wandered around the cave, as he persisted in calling it. He
discovered several outlets from Creedon Hall, and he made up his mind
that as soon as his friends were asleep he would steal the mask lantern
and go on an exploring expedition. It was a jolly party that sat down to
coffee, cold dried meat, and crackers. Brooks had been very sparing of
his crackers, and had at least five pounds of them at the time he and
Desmond met the guide.

"When did you discover this place?" asked Desmond.

"I did not discover the place; it was revealed to me by an old hunter, a
Mexican, and how he discovered it he would never tell. The old man had a
great many secrets, and I have sometimes thought that there was gold
hidden here somewhere. I've spent days searching for it, but never could
find anything of the value of a red cent."

"Where is the old Mexican now?"

"That's hard to tell, lad; he died about five years ago, and his body
was carried to the ruins of an old Spanish church and there buried as he
had requested long before he died. He was a strange old man; he
possessed many secrets, but they died with him. It is possible he meant
to reveal them some day, but death caught him and he went out with his
mouth closed as far as his secrets were concerned. He was a sort of
miser in secrets. I did think that some day the old man would reveal
something of value to me; he pretended to think a great deal of me. I
saved his life at a critical moment; he was actually bound to the stake,
and I shot the rascal who was about to light the fire. They intended to
burn him alive, and the arrival of myself and party was just in time."

"Do the Indians still burn their prisoners at the stake?"

"These were not Indians--they were his own countrymen. They had tried to
force a confession from him, and because he refused to reveal the
whereabouts of the gold they thought he had stored away somewhere, they
were set to murder him in anger and revenge."

"And you saved him?"

"I did."

"And he never revealed his secrets to you?"

"Only the secret of this cave. He often made strange remarks and hinted
that some day I would receive my reward. We roomed here together all of
one winter, but he died and never opened his mouth to reveal where his
gold was, if it is true that he had any. I believe he did, but it will
never do me any good, and I do want to make a fortune somehow, but I
suppose I never will. Yes, lad, there are thousands of skeletons of
gold-seekers hid away in caverns in these mountains, victims of the same
ambition which is leading us to take such desperate chances."

Desmond was very greatly interested in the story of the old Mexican, and
he asked a number of questions.

"You never got the least inkling as to where his gold was hidden?"

"I don't know that he had any gold; it is only a suspicion on my part."

"He lived in this cave?"

"Yes."

"Did you ever search here?"

"Well, you bet I did."

"And did you explore?"

"You bet I did."

"And you never found anything?"

"I never did."

"Nor secured any indication?"

"Never."

"Possibly you did not look in the right place."

"That is dead certain," came the natural answer.




CHAPTER IV.

ON AN EXPLORING EXPEDITION--A FIND IN A CAVE--THE
SEPULCHRAL VOICE--THE EXPLANATION--DESMOND
GETS SQUARE ON A TRICK--STRANGE LONGINGS--THE
FINDING OF A NUGGET.


It was about midnight when the older men lay down on their blankets to
sleep. Creedon had a big silver bull's-eye watch, and he said he always
kept it going.

Desmond pretended to lie down and go to sleep also, but his head was
filled with visions of the Mexican's hidden gold. He had an idea that
Creedon's investigations might have been very superficial; he determined
to make a thorough and systematic search, and he actually believed he
would find the hidden gold.

Brooks and Creedon were good sleepers; both were very weary and they
were soon in a sound slumber, and then Desmond arose, stole on tiptoe
over beside Creedon and secured the mask lantern. A strange, weird scene
was certainly presented. There had been a big fire; the embers were all
aglow and illuminated the cave. There lay Brooks and Creedon, looking
picturesque in their hunting garb, and there was Desmond stealing on
tiptoe under the glare of the firelight to secure the mask lantern.

Having secured the lantern the lad moved away and made for a crevice
which promised the best results. He knew enough of rock conformations to
go forward very carefully, always flashing his light ahead and studying
the path in advance, and so slowly, carefully, and surely he moved along
until he had traversed, as he calculated, a distance of two hundred and
fifty feet, when suddenly his flashlight revealed a solid wall in front
of him.

"Here we are," he muttered, "and no mistake."

Desmond saw that his explorations in that direction had ended. He
retraced his steps and selected a second crevice along which he made his
way, and at length he landed in a pretty good sized inner cave.

"Well, I reckon we've got it here."

The lad proceeded to search around with the care of a detective looking
for clues. He did find evidences of some one having been in the cave; he
found the handle of a dirk, a small bit of a deerskin hunting jacket,
and finally a little bit of pure gold. He examined the latter under his
lamp, satisfied himself that it was a nugget of real gold in its natural
state, and his heart beat fast.

"I've got it at last," he muttered; "yes, I thought I knew how to carry
on this search. Creedon must have done it too hurriedly."

Desmond felt quite proud of his success; he had struck it sure, as he
believed, and he continued his search, and was intently engaged when
suddenly he heard a sepulchral groan at the instant he had plunged into
a sort of pocket and was feeling around; but when he heard that groan he
started back into the cave and stood as white as a sheet gazing around
in every direction, and there was a wild terror in his eyes. He stood
for fully two minutes gazing and listening, and finally he said:

"Great Scott! what was that I heard--a groan?"

Desmond, although brave and vigorous, after all was but a lad of less
than eighteen. He could have faced a grizzly bear, but when it came to
the supernatural he was not equal to it. The fact was he was dead
scared, and, then again he believed he had really struck the hidden
recess where the old Mexican's gold was secreted.

The young are more susceptible to superstitious fears, as a rule, than
older people; they are not skeptical.

Desmond listened a long time, and as he did not hear the noise again,
and feeling an intense desire to find the hidden treasure, he again went
to the rock pocket and plunged in, but immediately there came again the
groan, clear, distinct, and unmistakable, and also a voice commanding:

"Go away, go away; do not disturb my gold."

The lad leaped out into the main cave again, and he trembled from head
to foot. He had never received such a shock in all his life; he had
never really believed in ghosts--never thought much about them
indeed--but here he had at least evidence that the dead did watch their
treasures. Still, the desire to secure the wealth was strong upon him;
naturally he was, as our readers know, very nervy, and he determined to
argue with the ghost. He reasoned that the hidden wealth could be of no
benefit to the spirit where he was, and he thought he might talk him
into keeping quiet.

It was in a trembling voice that Desmond asked:

"Is the spirit here?"

The answer came:

"I am here."

A more experienced person than Desmond would have gotten on to the fact
that it was very strange that the spirit should answer him in such good
English, it being supposed to be the spirit of a Mexican, but spirits
probably can talk any language. At any rate, Desmond did not stop to
consider.

"Do you own the gold?"

"Yes."

"Why can't I have it? I've found it."

"You get away as quick as you can or I'll seize you."

Well, well, this was a great state of affairs; Desmond did not ask any
more questions. He seized his lamp and started to limp from the cave,
and he was white and trembling. He made his way to Creedon Hall and
beheld Brooks and Creedon standing over the fire. On the face of Brooks
there was an amused look, and on Creedon's an expression of real
jollity.

"Great sakes! Desmond," demanded Brooks, "where have you been? I awoke
and found you missing, and Creedon and I have been scared almost to
death."

Desmond tried to assume an indifferent air, and said:

"I wasn't sleepy, so I thought I would go and explore a little."

"You had better be careful how you explore around here."

"Why?"

"Well, that's all; I won't say any more, but be careful, or you may be
suddenly missing."

"What did you find, boy?"

"I'll tell you all about it in the morning."

The men retired to their blankets and Desmond also lay down, after
having promised that he would not attempt to explore any more that
night.

He did not sleep, however; the phantom voice, the treasure, and his
discovery kept him awake, and he lay thinking about ghosts and goblins,
and he muttered;

"Hang it! I never believed in ghosts;" then as he lay there, there came
to his mind a recollection of the jolly look that had rested on the face
of the guide, and there came to his mind a suspicion, and then a
certainty, that he had been fooled. He was a wonderfully sharp lad, and
he began to think the whole matter over, and he recalled the fact that
the ghost had spoken good English.

"Hang me!" he muttered, "if I don't believe I've been made a victim of a
huge joke, and Brooks and Creedon are both guilty in aiding to give me a
scare. All right, to-morrow we will see all about it; I'll get square."

Desmond did fall asleep at length, and when he awoke Brooks and Creedon
were eating their breakfast, and Creedon said as Desmond joined them:

"So you were exploring last night?"

"Yes."

"What did you find?"

"Gold."

"You did?"

"Yes."

"Oh, come off."

"I did."

"You think you did."

"I did, I'll swear I did."

"Where did you find it?"

"In a cave which one of those passages leads to."

"You found gold?"

"Yes."

"You will have to be careful."

"Careful?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"You'll strike the ghost."

"The ghost?"

"Yes."

"What ghost?"

"The ghost of the old Mexican."

"I did think I heard a groan. Tell me about the old Mexican."

"I've told you all I know about him, and I'll tell you that in my
opinion it will be dangerous to meddle with his gold, even if you found
it."

"Could that old Mexican speak English?"

"A little."

"Only a little?" repeated Desmond.

"Yes."

"Then it's just as I suspected; I tell you I was scared at first, but
when the old ghost answered me--"

"When the ghost answered you?" demanded Creedon.

"Yes."

"Did you see the ghost?"

"I heard him--that is, I thought I did--and I spoke to him, but he gave
me back such good English I made up my mind that you didn't know how to
play a joke. Next time stick to the broken English; you might have
scared the life out of me then."

Brooks and Creedon laughed, and the latter said:

"Well, you are smart, you are; but, lad, let me tell you something:
don't spend time looking for the Mexican's gold."

"Why not?"

"I've explored every nook and cranny in this mountain, and there is no
treasure hidden here."

"But I found some gold."

"You did?"

"Yes."

Creedon and Brooks stared.

"Are you in earnest?"

"I am."

"Where did you find it?"

"Well, I am going to consider awhile before I tell."

Brooks looked Desmond straight in the face, and asked:

"Boy, honest, did you really find gold?"

"Yes, I did."

The matter began to assume a very serious aspect, for Desmond spoke
seriously.

"If you found any gold, lad, you've beat me."

"I did find gold."

"On your honor?"

"Yes."

"Well, here we are on shares; tell us all about it."

Desmond laughed in turn; they had had their laugh and he had his laugh,
as he said:

"Here is what I found."

The lad produced the little nugget he had picked up and then Creedon
laughed, and said:

"By George! that is the bit of gold I lost, and I had a good hunt for
it."

Our hero had been impressed by Creedon's statement that he had examined
every nook and corner in the mountain, and yet he did feel a sort of
hankering notion that he could find the gold, and he said:

"I want to explore again."

"All right; it can do no harm, but I will relinquish all claim now to
any gold that you may find in this cave."

"I'll take you at your word," said Desmond.

Of course the youth had no real hope of ever finding any gold, but it is
a known fact that such finds have been made, and sometimes the skeletons
of the owners have been found bleaching beside their gold.




CHAPTER V.

BOY'S DETERMINATION--GOING THROUGH A CREVICE--THE
MOVABLE ROCK--AID TO DISCOVER--UP THROUGH
A HOLE--THE GOLDEN HEAP--DESMOND'S GREAT
TRIUMPH--THE OLD MEXICAN'S SECRET EXPOSED.


Desmond was somewhat impressed by the words of Creedon, but still
insisted that he would like to conduct an exploration.

"You will only go over the ground that I have already gone over."

"I know that, but I propose to look around all the same."

Desmond had been doing considerable thinking. He questioned Creedon
again and again, and made out that the old Mexican had lived in the cave
along with Creedon for months at a time, and as he learned, the old man
had thrown out a great many hints. These hints meant something; and then
again, if he had hidden his wealth in the cave he had done it so
securely and well that he had no idea of its ever being discovered until
such time as he saw fit to disclose the fact. Desmond knew how there
were some strange conformations in the rocks; the very place they were
in was a testimony to the strange freaks that nature in its upheavals
can and does create.

Brooks had nothing to say about the matter, and Creedon did remark
finally:

"Of course, as I've said, it can do no harm, but be careful you don't
strike--"

Desmond here interrupted, and said:

"I ain't afraid of ghosts; I've met one and I've got used to them."

"I don't mean a ghost, I mean a crevice; go very slow and carefully, or
you may become a ghost yourself."

Right here we wish to exchange a few words with our readers in regard to
these rock conformations. Right in the State of New York, in Ulster
County, and in what is called the Shawangunk Mountains, there are some
of the most wonderful caves and crevices, and in some of these caves
during the winter the snow drifts down, and in the spring becomes a
solid mass of ice, and the writer remembers upon one occasion after a
long and weary scramble over rocks under the face of a cliff which
towers up and overlooks counties, being shown a rock cave where there
was a solid mass of ice, which, in its contour resembled a ship. The ice
must have been at least sixty feet in length, twenty feet broad, and
fully forty feet high, and adjoining it were all manner of caves. These
caves are within a few miles of several settlements, and possibly at the
time of the visit of the writer had not been entered by over a dozen
persons. In these mountains are some very remarkable rock conformations,
and we merely mention this fact to the lads in the East, who may think
that these stories of rock caverns are exaggerated. There are probably
hundreds of caves in the Catskill and Shawangunk Mountains that have
never been entered or explored since the days when the early settlers
may have found them while bear hunting.

Desmond had been raised, as we have stated, near the mountains, and
probably had explored many rock caverns, and it is because of this fact
probably that he was not surprised when led to the cave where he first
beheld the girl Amy Brooks. That cave still exists and is well known to
many of the people living in its vicinity, and in our description we
adhered to almost absolute accuracy.

Creedon was a rough and ready sort of man, but not, the fellow, as
Desmond argued, who would apply himself to a critical study. It was a
great thing to have learned the facts concerning the old Mexican, and
the lad really believed that there was gold secreted somewhere in one of
the little cavities in that perforated mountain.

Creedon started in to relate to Brooks the facts about the mine he
believed he had discovered, and Desmond, taking the mask lantern,
started off to explore.

"You will burn out all my oil, lad; that is the only harm you will do,
and certainly little good. I cannot replenish the oil when it's burned
out, and I've been very careful, holding it for only such occasions as
when we came here across the chasm."

Creedon explained that he had only carried with him one can of oil,
which had lasted him to date.

Desmond started off and went direct to the crevice he had first entered,
and Creedon smiled as he saw him go in there, remarking to Brooks:

"The lad will run up against a stone wall sure, but he is enthusiastic;
it will be a lesson to him."

"Can't tell about that lad," said Brooks, "there is method in his
enthusiasm."

"That's all right, but I was camped in here one whole winter, and as I
told you, there is not a nook or cranny that I have not explored."

"But there are others," said Brooks, with an odd smile on his face.

Meantime, Desmond followed the crevice until he came to the stone wall.
He knew about the same wall, but he was working on a certain theory. He
was like the Captain Kidd treasure-seekers--the discouragement of others
did not in any way discourage him, and we will here say that a similar
persistence in any walk of life, as a rule, leads to great results.

Desmond, as stated, arrived opposite the stone wall, and he commenced a
calm, steady, determined examination. First appearances would have
discouraged any man, being faced as he was by a solid, smooth face of
rock. He stood contemplating the mass before him, and then with the ray
of light from his lantern he ran all over the rock.

"By ginger!" he muttered at last, "I reckon it's true. There does not
appear a hole big enough in that rock for a spider to crawl through;
but, hang me! I've got an impression."

There appeared to be a break in the rock just where it joined with the
roof of the cave. Desmond rolled a bowlder over against the rock and
mounted, and ran his finger over the crack. It was not a large crack and
offered no encouragement, but the lad was determined not to be satisfied
until he had established facts beyond all dispute. He ran his finger, as
stated, along the crack, and his knuckle pressed against the roof, and
to his surprise there appeared to be a loosening. He examined it and he
saw that there was a uniform crack running along the roof inclosing a
space about two feet square. The lad instinctively pressed on the center
between the cracks, and lo, there appeared to be a piece of the roof
that yielded. He pressed harder and satisfied himself that the piece of
rock between the cracks in the roof was movable. The discovery caused
his heart to stand still, and he muttered:

"Great Scott! but I've found it." He flashed the light on the crack and
thought he could discern where there had been some chiseling. He made
every effort to shift the rock out of its place, but it was too much for
him, owing to the fact that he could just about reach it. He did not
have purchase enough to exert his full strength.

He stepped down on the floor again and commenced to consider, and then
he determined to return to the main cave and solicit Brooks and Creedon
to go to his aid.

When he re-entered the main cavern Creedon with a laugh said:

"Well, lad, did you run up against a stone wall?"

"I did."

"I told you it was of no use to search these crevices. I've explored
every inch."

"You have?"

"Yes."

"I think not."

Brooks knew Desmond so well he discerned that the lad had really made a
discovery, but he said nothing.

"You think not, eh?"

"I do."

"That would hint that you had found something."

"I have."

"What have you found?"

"I don't know yet, but I am certain I have found a cranny or nook that
you never explored."

"You have?"

"I have."

"What have you found?"

"Oh, it may be that it's 'tellings,' as the boys say."

Creedon looked at the lad in a curious way.

"It cannot be possible," he said, "that you have found anything?"

"Yes, I have."

"What have you found?"

"Guess."

"It's no time to guess; what have you found?"

"I'll show you what I've found; I want your help."

The lad found a piece of sapling about seven feet in length, and said:

"You gentlemen come with me; I'll show you something."

Animated by great interest and curiosity, Brooks and Creedon followed
Desmond. He led them to the little rock cave where the crevice abutted
on the solid wall of rock, and he said:

"Now what do you see?"

"We see the rock."

"Is that all?"

"Yes."

"Look sharp; there is something you have not discovered before."

"What is it?"

"Look."

"I've looked."

"I reckon when you did look upon the occasion of your former visits you
did as you are doing now--only _looked_, but you did not search."

"Have you searched?"

"Yes, I have."

"And you've found something?"

"Yes, I have."

"What?"

"Oh, look."

"I'm done looking."

"Then let me show you."

Desmond took the strong piece of sapling he had brought with him and
jammed one end with great force against the square piece of roofing, and
the piece of rock moved.

Creedon gazed aghast and exclaimed:

"By all that's strange and wonderful, but I believe you have unfolded
the Mexican's secret."

"I think so; and now lend me your strength, both of you, and let's see
if we can move that loose piece of rock. I'll bet there is an opening
there."

"You are right--yes, lad, you have indeed raked into the old Mexican's
treasure den; I can recall now some words he once spoke."

"Don't spend any more time recalling; let's shove that rock aside if we
can."

The two men lent their aid to Desmond, and sure enough they did raise
the piece of rock, and by hoisting it they managed to move it aside a
trifle, enough to reveal the fact that there was a chamber above, and
that the opening was through the piece of rock.

It was a reward of Desmond's persistence, but after all it was accident
that had revealed to him the opening.

By hard work the men finally succeeded in moving the rock aside, and
there was disclosed the opening, and Desmond said:

"Now let me stand on our shoulders with the light and I will tell you
what it is we have found. There is something there to reveal, I am dead
sure."

The two men assisted Desmond to their shoulders. He took the lantern and
shoved his head through the opening, and then flashed the light around,
and with a joyful shout exclaimed:

"We've got it!"

"This beats me dead," said Creedon.

Both men were greatly excited, for it did appear that they had made a
great find of hidden treasure.

Meantime, Desmond managed to force himself up and disappeared in the
cave. He glanced around and beheld a sight that filled him with varying
emotions.

The chamber was not more than four feet square, but on the floor in one
corner was a shining heap. It shone under the ray of his lantern as he
flashed the light upon it. He took a handful of the shining stuff and
passed it down to Creedon, handing him the lantern at the same time, and
he said:

"You are a good judge; tell me what that is?"

"It's gold dust," cried Creedon; "how much is there of it?"

"Oh, barrels full, I should say."

"Great ginger! lad, you've struck it."

"Well, it won't run away, I reckon, but give me your hat and I'll fill
it."

"Is that to be my share?"

"No, we're only giving you the first whack at it, that's all."

Desmond filled Creedon's hat with the dust and then descended, and the
whole party made their way to the outer cavern.




CHAPTER VI.

DISCUSSING THE FIND--A NEW RESOLUTION--GOING TO CREEDON MINE--A
DISAPPOINTMENT--BETTER INDICATIONS--A NEW MOVE.


Once in the outer cavern, Desmond said:

"It's now a matter of business."

"Well?"

"How shall we divide?"

"You are the finder," replied Creedon; "you are to decide."

"You leave it to me?"

"Yes."

"I'll make it an even divide all round."

"Boy, it's a great discovery."

"What do you think of its value?"

"It depends upon the weight, but from your description I should say we
had a ten-thousand-dollar find."

Desmond's eyes opened wide, and after a moment he asked:

"Does it really belong to us?"

"It does certainly; I am really the appointed heir of the old Mexican,
but anyway treasure-trove goes to the finder who can establish a right
to it."

"We can," said Brooks.

"You bet we can, and it is ours, but it's strange how the old Mexican's
secret has been opened up. Here I've had five years to search for this
gold and failed to find it, and this lad gets on to it in one day."

"It was a mere chance."

"Well, yes, to a certain extent; but if you had not been so persistent
you would not have developed the chance and made the find possible."

"How did the old man accumulate this gold?"

"It's plain enough; he has known some stream and has washed it, and
possibly it took him ten years to gather the heap you found there; but
how well he did it!"

"He did, sure."

"How shall we make a divide?"

"Easy enough if you will let me make a suggestion."

"Certainly."

"We will carry it all out here; we run no risk, no one will ever
penetrate to this retreat; then when we have it all carted out here we
will divide it, a coffee cup full at time."

"Good enough; that suits me."

"But wait; I've a better proposition if you will accept it."

"Go ahead."

"Let's leave it where it is, go on to my mine, and if it amounts to
anything we will have the capital to work it ourselves."

Desmond glanced at Brooks, and the man said:

"That is a good proposition."

Brooks was less suspicious than Desmond, but the lad determined to
accede to the proposition, and it was decided that on the following
morning they would start for Creedon's mine, and the guide said:

"We will start before daylight."

"Why?"

"We had better cross the chasm in the dark; I am afraid you would hardly
recross it if you were to behold once what would be underneath you."

It was so decided.

The party made all their preparations and on the following morning,
before daylight, with the aid of Creedon's ladder the party crossed the
chasm and proceeded on their way toward the place where Creedon's mine
was located. They managed to secure enough game which they cooked and
had for food, and commenced their long march, and it was a long march.
They had been five days on the tramp, and stopped one night to camp,
when Creedon said:

"In the morning we will be on the ground."

The place where they were camped was a mountain glen, and our young
friend Desmond, being in splendid health, was exceedingly happy. The
life thus far had been one of constant excitement, and therefore at his
age one of continuous enjoyment, and besides, to crown all, he was
comparatively rich. As intimated, Creedon had valued the dust at ten
thousand dollars, and when it should be turned into money Desmond could
indeed clear his mother's farm and go to school, and then to college,
and it was his highest ambition to obtain a fine education. He was an
ambitious lad.

Creedon was restless and excited all the evening; for him a great
decision was to be rendered. He had come to know that Brooks was indeed
an expert, and should the latter decide that his claim was of value it
meant that for which he had been struggling a long time, as he had said,
for fifteen years.

Creedon did not sleep; much danger would not have kept him awake, but
the possibilities of the dawning day did cause exceeding restlessness.
Desmond noticed that the woodsman did not sleep and went over and sat
near him.

"What's the matter, lad; why don't you sleep?"

"Why don't you sleep?"

"To tell the truth, I can't."

"Neither can I."

"I don't see what keeps you awake."

"The possibilities of the coming day."

Creedon was in a thoughtful mood, and Desmond asked:

"Why are you so anxious to get rich?"

"Lad, I'll tell you: I am thirty-three years old; I started from home
when I was less than eighteen; my father was a poor man. Living in our
town was a rich man who had a lovely daughter; she was just fifteen. I
had known her from the time we were wee little tots, and we fell in love
with each other, although she was fifteen and I but a little past
seventeen, but her father was rich; he despised low people, and that
girl and I agreed that I was to leave home, go into the world and earn a
fortune, and go back and claim her. We made a solemn agreement, pledged
ourselves under the stars, she was to wait for me even if I did not
return until I was a gray-haired man. Boy, she is waiting yet; she is a
handsome woman now--I have her photograph--and once a year I receive a
letter from her. She has urged me to return; her father is dead and she
has a competency in her own right, but I am not willing to go home,
marry her and live on her money; and besides, I want to get rich--real
rich. I wish to buy her the finest house in our native town, give her
horses and carriages; I'll die before I will return poor. The people in
the town have often and often hurt her feelings by their deridings,
telling her that I had forgotten her, that if I did succeed in winning a
fortune I would never return to her, but would marry some one else. They
told her I was a thriftless vagrant, never would get rich, and through
all this she has remained true to me, and every time I receive a letter
from her she urges me to return. I don't know; if my mine turns out all
right I will return, if it don't I will not return, and here I am just
about to learn what the chances are. It means to me life, love, and
happiness, or a return to the endless longing that has inspired me for
the last fifteen years; but, boy, I will never return unless I have a
fortune."

"No wonder you are restless, and I am now as much interested in our
success on your account as I am on my own."

"I have high hopes, lad--yes, high hopes."

On the morning following the dialogue related, all hands were up bright
and early and they started for the mine, and in two hours were on the
ground. Creedon was pale as a pictured ghost while pointing out to
Brooks the indications, and Brooks also was excited as he made his
study.

We will not bore our readers with an account of the investigations made
by Brooks, but will state that at the end of the second day he was
compelled to announce that the mine was valueless.

Desmond thought he had never seen a more disconsolate look on any man's
face than the one that settled over the face of Creedon when the
announcement was made.

"Your mine don't amount to anything in itself," said Brooks, "but it
carries a suggestion; it is a compass that points to where a valuable
mine may be found. We are not in it yet; to-morrow I will make a survey
and I may get indications that will carry us to the ledge where the gold
ores extend in paying quantities--yes, I think I can read the
indications as plainly as though the road were mapped out."

Brooks spent two days, and then said:

"It's all right; there is a mine somewhere, but I must have the proper
instruments and testing utensils. I will leave you and Desmond here in
the mountains and proceed to the nearest settlement and secure what I
need. Creedon, I can almost promise you that we will find a rich
digging, and it will be more accessible than this one."

"I have a better plan," said Creedon.

"What is your plan?"

"We will go and get the dust that the lad found; we will carry that to
the town, dispose of it, get our money, make our deposits in the bank,
and then start in on the search. Possessing the knowledge that you do,
we will find a mine. I am not discouraged yet."

It was so agreed, and the party made their way back to where they had
their store of dust. Creedon had made some deerskin bags so that the
burden would not fall upon one person. The dust was all secured and they
made a start for the town.

On the night when they made their last halt before ending their trip in
the town, Brooks, the wizard tramp, took advantage of an opportunity to
talk to Desmond alone. He said:

"Lad, to-morrow we will be in the town and we will have money. I have a
proposition. It will take a year or two to develop matters in case I do
locate the mine; you cannot afford at your time of life to spend a year.
I do not need you with me now. I am a man again, thanks to you, and I
will make a confidant of Creedon. He is a manly, honest fellow, and will
watch over me. Our joint interest will make him a splendid sentinel. I
feel that we are sure to win, if not in one direction in another. With
my scientific knowledge and his practical knowledge we will win, but it
may be two or three years. This is a fascinating life for you, but you
cannot afford to lose this valuable time."

"What is it you are about to propose?"

"I can send you home with five thousand dollars and I will still have
money enough to carry on our purpose. You can clear off the farm and go
to school; you are ambitious, and in less than a year you will be
prepared to stand an examination for college, and you can go with a
cheerful heart, for if my life is spared I will win a fortune for you. I
have no use for a fortune myself; I am working for you and Amy."

"But suppose something should happen to you? Do you remember you have
not made your revelation?"

"I propose to provide for that; I will confide to you a document. It is
not to be opened until you are assured of my death, so living or dead
you shall in good time learn the great secret that I have held all these
years."

"I must think this matter over," said Desmond.

"There must be no thinking. I have decided as to what you must do."

"And you do not want me to go back at all?"

"No, I want you to go home to the State of New York; I want you to go to
clear off the farm and go to school, and I will attend to your affairs
out here."

"I will decide in the morning."

That night Desmond thought over the whole matter. He had become
fascinated with the life in the mountains, but when he revolved the
whole matter in his mind he saw that it was indeed wiser for him to
return to his home; and under what joyful circumstances he would
return! He could clear the farm and have money in the bank; he could go
to school and go to college, and devote his whole attention to study
without any worry or fear, and in the morning he greeted Brooks with the
announcement:

"I have decided to obey you."




CHAPTER VII.

A SAD PARTING--PROPHETIC WORDS--ON THE TRAIN--A
SENATOR'S SON--LEADING UP TO A TRICK--GENUINE
FUN AHEAD.


There came a sad look to the face of Brooks, and he said:

"I shall miss you, Desmond, but I feel it is for the best. You are a
youth of great promise. I do not mean to flatter you, I am speaking the
truth, and it is in your interest that I so warmly advocate your return
to the East. I desire that you become an educated man, a graduate of
college; I wish you to secure your degree. And let me tell you now there
was fate in our meeting, and very remarkable consequences may follow our
acquaintance begun and maintained under such strange circumstances."

Desmond had never beheld his strange friend, the wizard tramp, under a
similar mood. There appeared to be a prophetic spell prompting the words
of the strange man.

"I hope you do not wish to get rid of me."

"No, I am speaking in your interest alone, lad; my life has been a
wasted one, yours is just commencing. You can be of some use in the
world, I have been a nuisance. I have a strange tale to tell--yes,
Desmond, like many others I have encountered a romance in life. I
deliberately threw myself away, but where I failed you can win; there is
a chance for you to become a useful man; great honor may await you
because you possess the qualities that win success. You are brave, firm,
and persistent, also enterprising; with these qualities, in this land,
any young man can win a success against the great throng of unambitious
and careless men like myself."

"Can you trust yourself?"

"I can."

"You are certain?"

"I am."

"You do not need me?"

"I do not."

"Remember, your weakness upon several occasions permitted you to fall."

"I have considered everything; I have an object in life now and a
prospect."

"A prospect?"

"Yes."

"Is there anything you are concealing from me?"

"I am considering your interests alone," was the reply.

"But your revelation?"

"It is not necessary for me to tell you once again that I have provided
for you to learn the secret of my life in case anything should happen to
me."

Desmond at once began his arrangements for a return to the East. He had
been away for many months; he had plenty of money; his return would be
in great triumph in every way. He purchased fine clothes, which he was
able to do even in the far Western town where he was stopping, and when
he arrayed himself in his good clothes even Brooks was surprised at the
wonderful transformation well-fitting attire made in the youth. Desmond
was indeed a fine-looking fellow, well educated comparatively, and as is
not unusually the case, he was naturally capable of adapting himself to
changed conditions. He did not seem awkward in his good clothes, but
appeared as though he had worn fine attire all his life.

At length the hour came when Desmond and Brooks were to part company.
The wizard tramp had a sad look upon his face, although he tried to be
cheerful and jovial The attempt, however, was a failure. He said:

"I will not go with you to the train, Desmond, we will part here, and
you can address your letters to me here; I will arrange to have them
forwarded to me in case I go prospecting again."

"You will go prospecting, I suppose, of course."

"I cannot tell; but remember, if anything happens to me I have arranged
for you to be communicated with."

There came a look of concern to our hero's face, and the discerning
Brooks said:

"You have something to say."

"I have an idea."

"Well?"

"There is great peril in the wilderness."

"Yes."

"There have been cases where men have lost their lives and their deaths
have not become known until many years afterward."

"That is true, lad, and I have calculated for that."

"You have?"

"Yes."

"How?"

"You will know if such an event should occur. In the meantime let me
tell you if a year should pass and you do not hear from me you will know
that I am dead."

"And then?"

"Tell Amy."

"And then?"

"She may make a disclosure to you. Remember, I have taken every
precaution."

"I do not know why you should withhold from me your life secret. No harm
could come of an immediate revelation, but of course you have your own
reasons for withholding your story."

"Yes, that is it, I have reasons; no harm might come of an immediate
revelation, but I have reasons of a very satisfactory character to
myself. You will understand and appreciate them when they are made known
to you. Desmond, I am a changed man; you need have no fear concerning me
now; time has righted a wrong. I am strong now--that is, normally
strong--all will go well, I believe, if not with me at least with you."

A little later and our hero was on his way across the country to the
town where he was to take the train, and a better equipped lad for
adventure never boarded a train, and lo, he encountered several very
thrilling adventures ere he arrived at the valley farm where kind hearts
beat to greet him.

Desmond had been on the train but a few minutes really when he observed
a tall, country-looking young fellow, who fixed his eyes on him. As has
been demonstrated all through our narrative, Desmond was a very quick,
discerning chap; in the language of the day, he was "up to snuff," and
the instant he caught the eye of the country-looking fellow he knew that
something was up, and he discerned more which will be disclosed as our
narrative advances.

Desmond had not boarded a through train; he was to go to a large town
where he would meet a through express. The train he had entered was a
way train, and he seated himself by the window. No one was in the seat
with him at first, but soon the country-looking chap took a seat beside
him. The latter appeared to be a jolly, innocent sort of chap, and he
addressed the young adventurer with the words:

"Hello!"

There came a merry gleam in Desmond's eyes, as he asked:

"Do you take me for a telephone?"

The stranger arched his eyebrows, and demanded:

"A telephone?"

"Yes."

"What makes you ask that question?"

"Because you yelled 'hello' in my ear."

"I've heard about telephones, but I never saw one."

"You never did?"

"No; what are they like?"

The question was asked seemingly in the most innocent manner, but the
keen-witted Desmond's suspicions were at once aroused, and on the
instant he made a curious discovery. The fellow was a make-up, under a
disguise, and consequently under immediate suspicion also.

"So you never saw a telephone?"

"Never."

"You _tell_ me that?"

"Yes."

Our hero knew he had a long journey before him; he was naturally very
fond of a joke and excitement, and besides he had instinctive hatred for
designing men. Our hero was aware that the trains, as a rule, are
infested with sharps, and the efforts of the railroad companies to
squelch these nuisances are not altogether successful. Our adventurer
determined to have a little amusement, and if his suspicions were fully
verified he was resolved to teach at least one sharp a good lesson. We
will repeat, Desmond did not look like an athlete or a youth who had
seen the rough side of life; he could easily be mistaken for an
ordinarily bright youth who had much to learn.

"So you really never saw a telephone?"

"Never," repeated the man.

Desmond, having determined upon his course of action, assumed a most
serious air, and with the greatest earnestness graphically described a
telephone, and the stranger appeared to be all interest and attention,
and expressed his surprise by innocent ejaculations, as our hero related
the wonderful possibilities of the telephone.

It was an amusing scene, or would have been to one who was under the
rose and understood that a game was being played.

When Desmond's description apparently, as stated, told in the most
earnest manner the sharp, as we shall call him, said:

"Well that beats me, it beats anything I ever heard. See here, stranger,
you are making a fool of me with a big fish story because I am a green
Western man, born and raised on the prairie."

"No, I've told you the truth."

"Well, well, you come from the city?"

"No, I am going to the city."

"New York?"

"Yes."

"Is that your home?"

"Well, _New York lies near where_ I live."

"Dear me, what wonderful sights you have seen!"

"Yes, sir."

"That New York is a wonderful place."

"You bet it is."

"I am going there some day--yes, I've said I'd see New York some day and
I will. It must make a man blind for a few days to go around there."

"Well, yes, it is rather dazzling," said Desmond.

So the conversation continued for quite a time and finally the stranger
rose and went away, saying he would return immediately. Quite a
respectable-looking man took the vacated seat beside Desmond, and the
last neighbor asked:

"Do you know that green-looking chap who was just talking to you?"

"No, sir, I never saw him before."

"Then you don't know who he is?"

"No, sir."

"That is a son of Senator F----, the richest mine owner out in this
section; he looks like a countryman. You see he was raised in the West,
but he is one of the most honest and good-hearted fellows in the world,
liberal to a fault, fond of fun, but a good and true friend to any one."

Desmond studied the man who was giving him this unsolicited information,
and he concluded that the nice-looking man was sharp number two; he was
up to this sort of business and perceived the whole game.

"Yes, he appears like a good, honest fellow," said Desmond.

"Honest? why, you could trust him with all you had in the world."

"Yes, he looks that."

"He is one of the kindest-hearted fellows in the world. I tell you if
you get into trouble he is the man to aid you. He is the best pistol
shot and rifle shot in the land. Why, that fellow has fought off a whole
tribe of Indians. The redskins fear him as a white man fears the devil,
and his father is one of the richest men out in this section, as I told
you."

"Yes. He don't look like a millionaire's son."

"No, but he is all the same, and he appears to have taken a great fancy
to you. I was watching him while he talked to you; I tell you no one
will interfere with you anywhere in this land if they know that he is
your friend."

"That's good."

"Yes. He is a splendid fellow."

The man who had volunteered all this information walked into a forward
car, and a few moments later the senator's son, so-called, returned, and
as frequently occurs in far Western trains, the particular car in which
Desmond was riding was deserted. Our hero and the countryman had the car
all to themselves, and after a little further talk the senator's son
said:

"I wish some greeny would come in here, we'd have some fun."

"How?"

"I'll tell you, I am a regular juggler; I know all the tricks of
gamblers and I'd fool a fellow."

"Do you know all the tricks of gamblers?"

"Yes, and sometimes I beat the game just for fun. You see I am down on
gamblers, I just like to beat them. Generally there are one or two of
those rascals on this train, but they know me; I don't get a chance at
them any more, so I sometimes amuse myself by astonishing greenhorns. By
ginger! but it's funny I've never been in New York; I am half a mind to
go right on to the great city with you."

"Yes, come along," said Desmond, a merry twinkle in his eyes.




CHAPTER VIII.

PLAYING TO CATCH A WEASEL--A SHARP'S
SCHOLAR--OPENING UP OF THE GAME--TWO
BIG HANDS--A CRISIS.


"I can't go, but I'd like to; but you give me your address, and some day
you will see me in York. I feel like the man who said, 'See Venice and
die;' I want to see New York. Say, they tell me there are a great many
sharpers in that wonderful city."

"Yes, it's full of them."

"Well, wouldn't I have fun beating those fellows, especially on the race
track, eh? They tell me these sharps are as thick as mosquitoes in
August down on the race tracks."

"Yes, they hover around there."

"I like you, young fellow."

"Thank you."

"Yes, I do."

"So you said."

"You're honest; I like an honest young fellow every time. Are you an
orphan?"

"A half orphan."

"Your mother dead?"

"No, my father."

"Well, I am just the other way--my mother is dead and my dad, he is away
up. They say he is a great man. I reckon he is, but I am no shakes; you
see I care more for fun than lands. Now, see here; I'll teach you some
tricks. Would you like to learn?"

"Yes, I would."

"Good enough, and when you get back to York you can punish some of those
sharps there, for my occupation is gone out here; they won't let me play
against them or I'd beat them every time--yes, I beat their game and
then give the money away to some poor person who needs it; but they
don't know you, and before we get to the end of the route some of those
fellows may get aboard, and as I said, they don't know you, and we'll
have some great fun; you can beat the game."

"I'd like to do that."

"You would?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"I was beaten once."

"You were?"

"Yes."

"At what game?"

"Three card monte."

"Well, well! and did they ever come the thimblerig on you?"

"Yes, I had a taste of that also."

"Then you've been through the mill?"

"Yes."

"Well, now, see here; I'll teach you the game, and you are the only one
I ever will teach it to; you are honest. But if I were to teach the game
to some fellows who claim to be honest they would start in as gamblers
right away."

"I never will."

"No, I can see that in your eye; you've got an honest face; I like you
clean through."

"Thank you again."

"Yes, and I am going to learn you a trick or two."

"I'll be glad to learn."

The man produced his cards and said:

"I always carry an outfit with me just for fun."

"Is that so?"

"Yes."

"That's fine."

We cannot in words describe the peculiar tones of our hero or the
singular expression upon his face, but he was playing for great fun. He
held in reserve a great surprise for the senator's son, a grand climax
and tableau was to close the scene, or rather, as Desmond classed it in
his mind, grand comedy. He did not know just how the fellow intended to
work his game; he believed the method would be a novel one, but he was
ready--yes, permitting himself to be led on to the grand climax.

The wizard tramp was an expert gambler and he had taught Desmond a great
many tricks in order to put the youth on his guard, and also for
amusement during their lonely hours together. All there was to learn
about the trick Desmond already knew, but he pretended ignorance, and
let the sharp go ahead. He proved an apt scholar, however, for the
senator's son said:

"Jiminy! I don't know but I am doing wrong."

"Doing wrong?"

"Yes."

"You learn so quick you appear to be a natural gambler."

"I am pretty quick at learning points, I will admit."

"You are great."

Our hero had just about mastered the intricacies of the game when, lo,
three men entered the car, and the sharp whispered to the lad:

"Great Scott! here are a lot of 'gambs' as sure as you are alive. I
wonder if they will give me a chance at them; if they do I'll show you
some fun, if they don't you are up to the trick, you are my pupil, and
you can show me the fun."

"That's so."

"Lay low, my friend, don't go too fast or these fellows will become
suspicious. I want to catch them good, and we will if you play it
right."

Desmond was on to the trick; he saw how the game was to be played, and
he appreciated that it was indeed a neat little trick. They were working
to fleece him differently from any little game he had ever seen or had
read about.

The "gambs," as the sharp had called the newcomers in the car, did not
betray their game at once. They took a seat a little distance off and
commenced playing among themselves "only for fun," as they said loud
enough to be overheard.

"We'll catch them," whispered the sharp.

"I don't know; they do not appear disposed to let us into their game;
maybe they are acquainted with you."

"Never mind, they will go for you. Let me see, I'll go out of the car,
see! and then they will make your acquaintance. I'll be at hand in case
there is a row."

"Yes, I see."

"We must catch these fellows and teach them a lesson."

"We will."

"We will have to blind them. Let me see; have you any money to make a
bluff on?"

"Yes, plenty."

"Make believe you are making a bet with me and show a roll, then we will
bait them and they will go for you; and, oh, won't we give 'em a lesson?
You bet we will; we'll just clean them out and give the money to some
needy person--that is, you can--and you'll meet many a poor cuss before
you get to New York."

"You can meet them anywhere."

"Have you got a roll?"

"Yes."

"A good sized one? for we want to give them a good bait."

Desmond was playing his part of the game well--very well--his whole
manner was right up to the mark--indeed, he did a fine piece of acting.
He pulled out a roll of bills, pretended to dispute with the sharp, and
suddenly exclaimed:

"I'll bet you a hundred."

"No, no, young fellow, I don't bet," said the sharp. "I know I am right,
I'd only be robbing you."

"I won't let you rob me; I am up to what I say."

The youth put an emphasis on his words which the sharp did not notice;
he thought he had such a sure thing, he was not looking for a false
"steer." Desmond saw the glitter, however, in the sharp's eyes at the
sight of the roll, for it looked like a big pile of money, and the sharp
appeared to feel, as indicated in his face, that the pile was already
his own.

"By ginger!" he said, "you are a dandy; you can play this game right up,
but don't be too anxious or you will scare those fellows off; just take
it easy, let them lead you on."

"Oh, I know how to work; don't you forget I am a Yorker."

"Yes, I see you Yorkers are smart fellows. You know a heap, I can see
that; but I did learn you some?"

"Yes, and when we get through here, I'll teach you a trick."

The sharp shot a keen glance at Desmond, and the lad saw that he had
been a little premature, but it was only a fuse that flashed, and the
sharp said, speaking in a very low tone:

"I'll go in the next car, but I'll be on hand at the right moment. I
want to enjoy the laugh when you catch these fellows. You are sure you
are on to the trick?"

"I am."

"You must keep your eyes well open."

"You bet I will."

The sharp left the car, and after a moment one of the confederates came
over and took a seat alongside of Desmond, and in a jolly, familiar
tone, he said:

"You bucked the senator's son down, didn't you?"

"Well, yes."

"It takes a good man to buck him down; He's got lots of stuff and sand
too, but you bucked him."

"Yes, I did."

"We're having a little game here to pass the time--it's awful dreary
these long rides. You see, we are salesmen and we've had some of these
fellows out here trying to rope us in, and we are trying to learn the
game."

"Don't you know the game?"

"No; do you?"

"Well, I know a little about it."

"Come along and show us what you know."

The party got together; Desmond appeared hale-fellow-well-met with the
rogues, and the game was played amid a great deal of laughter, until one
of the party said:

"By Jove! boys, I am on to this thing."

"You are?"

"Yes, I am."

"You daren't bet for fair."

"Yes, I dare."

"Oh, come off."

"I'll bet for fair; I'll give every one of you a chance."

"You will?"

"Yes, I will."

"Come off."

"I am in earnest; who'll go first and bet me?"

"I will," said one man.

"All right."

The cards were thrown and a bet made, and the dealer was beat and lost
apparently a ten-dollar bill.

"All right; I was beat that time. Who'll take a second hack at it? I've
got it all right, and I'll catch some of you fellows."

"Will you?"

"I will, by thunder."

The trick was being played in the most bungling manner, simply because
when properly played the exposure would have shown the game. The second
man bet and won, and the dealer said:

"I give it up, let's play a little game we know something about."

"What will it be?"

"I'll deal you fellows a little faro; we might as well pass the time
that way as any other."

A game of faro commenced and Desmond went into the game, and in a little
time the original sharp came in the car and wanted to take a hand, and
it was then that the gamblers said:

"No, we won't let you; you are a 'jack' player; we are only amateurs."

The party played faro for a little while and then a regular game of
poker was proposed. The latter was a game that all hands could play in
for a trick; even the senator's son was permitted to enter the game, and
winking in a knowing manner to our hero he did get in the game, and the
four proceeded up to a crisis where, as usual, two men held hands of
value, and as it chanced, the original sharp was the man who held a hand
against Desmond, and he said:

"Here, I'll only make a small bet; I don't want to win your money."

"I'll bet you anything you want," said Desmond.

"Hello! are you in earnest?"

"Yes, I am."

"Do you really want to get my money?"

"Yes, I do."

"Dead sure?"

"Yes."

"I've a big hand, I'll tell you that before you start in."

"That's all right, I'm betting on my hand."

"Now see here, young fellow, remember this is poker, and on principle I
always claim when I win, so don't bet high on your hand."

"I'll go as high as you choose."

"And you know what you are doing?"

"Yes."

"I am in dead earnest."

"So am I."

"Everything is barred?"

"Yes, everything," said Desmond.

"All right; if you will have it so swing out your roll. I'm betting
heavy on this hand, but I've warned you, remember."

"Yes, but you can't bluff me," said Desmond.




CHAPTER IX.

ALMOST A BREAK--A NOVEL GAME TO ROB--OUR HERO'S
ARTISTIC ACTING--A TABLEAU AND A GRAND SURPRISE.


Again the sharp fixed his eyes upon our hero, but it was not a
give-away; Desmond was playing his game too well. He appeared like an
excited gambler, an amateur, who apparently believed he had a sure
thing.

"I'll warn you once more," said the sharp.

"To the dogs with your warning, you daren't bet."

"Oh, yes, I dare bet, but I like you; I've a dead sure hand, you can't
beat me."

"That's my lookout."

"Then you know just what you are doing?"

"Yes, I do."

"These men can bear witness that I want to throw up my hand."

"You needn't."

"And you will really bet?"

"Yes, I will."

"With your eyes open?"

"Dead sure."

"All right; what is your raise?"

Desmond gave a lift and the sharp raised back, and so the play went on
until the stake was a thousand dollars on the two hands, and the sharp
said:

"See here, young follow, five hundred is enough for you to lose."

"No, no, I am not losing."

"You ain't?"

"No."

"Suppose you are mistaken."

"I can stand it."

"You can?"

"I can."

"All right; no use for me to attempt to stand against a young fellow
like you. I begin to suspect you've been playing innocent, and I will
teach you a lesson; I raise you a hundred."

"I see it and go two hundred better."

Each time a bet was made the money was laid on the table, and it was a
very exciting scene and moment. The sharp looked puzzled; he had laid
out for a dead sure thing, but there had come a complete change over
Desmond, and it was the latter fact that scared the sharp. He
hesitated, but at length, in a slow tone, said:

"I'll see you a call," and he laid down his cards. He held four jacks, a
great hand, but one that is often beaten, of course, and it was beaten
on this occasion, for, strange to declare, Desmond held four kings.

Right here let us offer an explanation. Our hero was playing against a
false deal; the man who was leading him made the fatal mistake that he
was working with a gudgeon on his hook, consequently he was not
watchful. The wizard tramp had taught Desmond a great many tricks, and
the lad's natural discernment and watchfulness had prepared him for the
hand when the great trick was to be sprung, and unwatched he worked a
bigger trick. He did not know what the hand was he was pitted against,
but he had been let in to gamblers' tricks, that is, "snide" gamblers.
These fellows in making a false deal do not win on the highest hands,
for they always know the hand against them. The fellow who was seeking
to rob Desmond thought he knew our hero's hand, but it was right there
he was fooled. Our hero had worked his own trick, as stated--he stole a
hand so deftly that the unwatchful robbers did not see him do it, and it
was there he had them. He was really taking a slight chance, but only a
slight one, and what followed? Well, it was a case of the biter bitten,
and when Desmond exposed his hand there came a look upon the sharp's
face that can never be described, but which might be photographed with a
snap-shot machine.

There fell a dead stillness in that car for a few seconds, and then the
defeated sharp said:

"Aha! you are a cheat."

"Am I?"

Desmond was perfectly cool.

"Yes, you are, and that money is mine."

"Is it?"

"Oh, see here, young fellow, don't you attempt to bluff me, or I'll mark
you."

As intimated, there had come a great change over Desmond. He did not
look like and he certainly did not act like the same person who a little
time previously had been learning gambling tricks from the sharp. The
gambler attempted to rake the money from the seat, and it was at that
moment the real fun commenced.

"You miserable rascal," cried Desmond, "lay a finger on a bill on that
seat and I'll pin your hand to the car seat."

Well, there was a scene of consternation around there just at that
instant, and our hero said:

"I've been carrying out your programme, amusing myself with a sneak
thief, and now, Mr. Senator's Son, you have evidence that Yorkers do
know a thing or two, and you get yourself together and get out of this
car and off the train at the next station, or I'll make a horse-fly net
of you. Is that plain English? Take your own money, I don't need it. You
are under cover, but let me give you a pointer--you play the senator's
son too well altogether to make a success of it."

The group of gamblers stared in silence. They did not dare make a
hostile move; there was something about Desmond in his transformed
appearance that froze them--indeed, even his youth was a mystery to
them, for he acted like a man who had had years of experience.

"You started in, gentlemen, to play a big game of robbery, but ran up
against a snag. I am letting you off easy--very easy--but you see we
young fellows from York are not malicious."

The gamblers had indeed gotten off easily, and we will here explain that
they did not fear Desmond in a scrimage; but they would have feared any
one who would have made a fight, as they did not wish to draw the
attention of the train men to their scheme which had been exposed. Had
they been winners they would have made a fight, but the game they were
attempting was one of highway robbery, for they had been outwitted in
the deal, and had no claim upon the money.

The train arrived at a station and the gamblers started to alight. They
felt bitter, and the self-styled senator's son said to Desmond:

"The train will stop here fifteen minutes. You are a good fellow, I like
you, I'd like to have you stop off a minute and have a cool drink with
us."

Desmond well knew the scoundrel's purpose, but being fond of adventure
he determined to give the rascals a still greater surprise. He was in
splendid condition, his muscles were developed up to the consistency of
whit-leather, and with a smile he rose to follow the man who had invited
him to alight for refreshment. The gambler stepped off the car ahead of
Desmond; the latter followed, when the former suddenly swung round and
made a vicious lunge at the youth who had so cleverly outwitted him, and
once again the scamp was outwitted. A second time he ran up against a
snag, for our hero dodged the blow that was meant for him and countered
with a tremendous slugger which landed on his assailant's nose, and over
the man fell with a swiftness that would have suggested the kick of a
horse, and when he fell he lay there; but two of the other chaps had in
the meantime made a rush for Desmond, and they received a rap
successively--indeed, they had run in on our young walking champion
where he was at home. He was a wonder in science, strength and agility;
no two or three ordinary men would have had any show with him at all,
and the fact was the assailants so determined, for the attack was not
renewed, and our hero stepped aboard the train, the object of the
wondering glances of twenty people who had witnessed the assault and
its culmination.

Desmond sat down in the car as coolly as though he had just gone out for
a breath of fresh air.

Our hero encountered several other adventures of a minor character, but
in good time arrived in New York City. He had not announced his return
to the farm, and consequently spent several days in the all-round
greatest city in the world. There is no place like old New York; there
is more life to be seen in the great American metropolis in one day than
can be seen in any other great capital in two. It is a city peculiar to
itself, unlike any other, in its situation between two rivers and its
nose practically putting out to the sea; in its activities and general
loveliness--indeed, it in a wonderful place, and Desmond enjoyed every
minute during his sojourn, but at length he took a train up-country and
in due time arrived at the station from which he was to team it to the
old farm where his grandfather and father had lived and died.

As stated, Desmond had not announced his return, and when within a mile
of the farm he alighted from the wagon that had carried him over and
started afoot. It was late in the afternoon when he arrived in sight of
the old farm, and he was standing on a rise of ground looking over
toward his old home, when he espied a girl sitting beneath a tree. One
glance was sufficient; he recognized Amy, and he determined to steal
upon her unawares. He managed to gain a clump of bushes located within
twenty feet of where the girl sat, and he had an opportunity to study
her unobserved. We will not describe his emotions, but it was a
beautiful sight that fell under his delighted gaze. The life on the farm
had been of great advantage to Amy in many ways, and in her white muslin
dress she appeared so beautiful as to make it seem that she was out of
place in that wild region. Her form was perfect in its grace, and her
face--well, we will not go into a description, but let it suffice to say
that there are few girls in all the world who surpass her in the
exquisite loveliness of her face.

Desmond studied the girl for a long time and he observed that she
appeared to be perfectly contented and happy. She had her mandolin with
her, and after quite a period of abstraction she took up her instrument,
and soon her splendid voice sounded clear and melodious on the still
air, for it was an afternoon when nature rested under a spell, as it
were; not a breath of air appeared to float amid the leaves and flowers.

A moment, and our hero made the most delightful discovery of his life.
Amy was singing and improvising; she did it readily and charmingly, and
her hidden auditor was indeed charmed. She was singing to an absent one,
and she mingled the name of our hero in her song. It was a plea for the
absent one to return, and the sweetness of the melody was not more
entrancing than the verses. She appeared to be not only a singer but a
poetess, possessed of rare talent.

Desmond did not appear inclined to break the spell, but when he saw Amy
making preparations to depart he stepped from his place of concealment.
The girl uttered a cry; at the first glance she did not recognize the
farmer boy, transformed as he was into a gentleman in dress, but when
she caught sight of his face and heard his merry laugh and pleasant
salutation, she exclaimed:

"Oh, Desmond, I did not know you at first. How elegant you look!"

"Thank you; how is my mother?"

"She is well, but did not know you were coming home; neither did I."

"Well, no, I thought I would give you a surprise. It's all right, here I
am, this side up with care."

"Your mother will be delighted."

"And you?"

"I am giddy with delight, and I hope all is well with you and with my--"
The girl stopped short and said, "Mr. Brooks."

"Yes, when I left him he was all right."

"Did he come with you?"

"No, he remained behind to transact some business; and, Amy, if you are
surprised to see me looking so elegant, as you say, you would be more
surprised did you behold at this moment your--I mean Mr. Brooks."

A shadow flitted across the girl's face, but it was succeeded a moment
later by a bright smile, as she said:

"Oh, I am so happy, I was never happier in my whole life."

"And what makes you so happy?"

The question was put abruptly.




CHAPTER X.

CONCLUSION.


Amy suddenly appeared to realize--well, our readers can guess what. It
appeared to cross her mind that she was betraying too great happiness,
and was a little too free in betraying it. She hesitated and blushed,
and after an instant of embarrassment Desmond said:

"Oh, don't be afraid, tell me why you are so happy."

"Everything makes me happy, and I shall continue to be happy unless--"
Again the girl stopped short.

"Go on," said Desmond.

"Unless I am to be taken away from your mother."

"Do you desire to remain with my mother?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"I love your mother."

"You love my mother?"

"Yes, I do."

"And who else?"

The question came in a pointed manner; Amy was a girl nearly sixteen.

"My--I mean Mr. Brooks."

"Who else?"

The girl did not answer.

"Come, Amy, who else do you love?"

"You are real mean."

"I am?"

"Yes."

"How?"

"You know."

"I do?"

"Yes."

"I don't want to be mean, but tell me who else you love?"

"I won't."

"You won't?"

"No."

There was bantering in the tones of both these young people at that
moment.

"Shall I tell you who I love?"

"Yes."

"I love my mother."

"You can't help it."

"I have learned to love Mr. Brooks, your--I mean--well, Mr. Brooks."

In a tantalizing tone the girl asked:

"Who else?"

"Oh, you're real mean," said Desmond, imitating Amy's tone at the
moment she had made the same remark to him.

"I don't want to be mean."

"You don't?"

"No."

"Will you keep my secret?"

"Yes," came the eager answer.

"Honor bright?"

"Yes, honor bright."

"You won't tell even my mother?"

The girl did not answer.

"Come, promise."

"I promise."

"I've met a girl I love, and I've made you my confidante, but don't tell
my mother."

Amy had turned desperately pale, and in a pettish, trembling tone, she
said:

"Yes, I will tell your mother."

"You promised not to do so."

"I don't care, I'll break my promise."

"Oh, Amy, you are real mean."

"I can't help it if I am."

"You can't?"

"No."

"Why not?"

"I am mad--real mad."

"You are?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Because you went and fell in love with a girl; it's ridiculous,
anyway."

"It is?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"You are only a boy."

"I am?"

"Yes."

"What are you, pray? you are only a girl."

"I know it."

"I couldn't fall in love with a mere girl, could I?"

"Yes, you could."

Desmond laughed in a merry manner, and said:

"Well, to tell the truth, I did fall in love with a mere girl. Do you
want to hear about her?"

"No."

"You don't?"

"No, I don't."

"I am going to tell you all the same; you are the girl I've fallen in
love with."

There came a bright, happy look to Amy's beautiful face as she said:

"Oh, you are real mean."

"I am?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"To tell me that so suddenly."

"Well, who else do you love?"

"I love you."

"All right; go and break your promise and tell my mother," said Desmond
in a provoking tone, following his advice by encircling Amy's waist and
imprinting upon her red-hot cheek a kiss.

"You tell your mother yourself," said Amy.

"No, I won't; you said you would."

"Then I will."

"You will?"

"Yes."

"Well, well!"

"Your mother will be glad."

"What?" ejaculated Desmond.

"Your mother will be glad."

"How do you know?"

"She told me so."

That night there was a happy party under the old farmhouse roof. Mrs.
Dare had met her son with tears of joy in her eyes, and Desmond had told
the weird tale of his remarkable adventures.

At once our hero set to work to prepare for college. He had talked the
matter over with his mother and with Amy, and in due time he did enter
Amherst College, and for a long time his adventures ceased. He heard
occasionally from Mr. Brooks, who appeared to be doing well and who sent
money on at intervals, but no explanation. And so the time passed until
Desmond graduated and returned home. He met his mother and Amy, and a
moment later there came forth from the house a well-known figure; it was
Brooks, the whilom wizard tramp.

Again there followed a pleasant evening, and on the following morning
Desmond was out bright and early to take a walk over the farm. He had
gone but a short distance when he saw a figure in the grove near the
house. He advanced and met his old friend the wizard tramp.

"You are out early," said Desmond.

"Yes, I thought I might meet you."

"And you will now tell me how you have succeeded?"

"Yes, Desmond, I will tell you all now, and I owe all to you. We are
rich--very rich. We found the mine, Creedon and I, and we got
capitalists interested and developed it. You were our silent partner,
and to-day you are worth a quarter of a million and I am worth as much
more, or rather Amy is, for I have been working for my child."

"I have suspected all along that Amy was your daughter. Has she told you
anything?"

"Yes, she has told me she is to become your wife."

"What do you think of it?"

"It has been the one hope of my life that you would win her love and she
yours. It was for this reason I insisted upon your returning to the
East, and the wisdom of my plans is fully confirmed."

"You have a revelation to make to me."

"I have made the revelation--Amy is my own child."

"And is that all you have to reveal? I've known that all along."

"That is my most important revelation, but I have another to make. My
father was the younger son of an English nobleman; he married a
beautiful but poor girl, as the world counts riches, and his father
drove him away, and he came here to America. He never saw his brother
again; his nephew, my cousin, inherited the estates and title, but
strange to say, I was the nearest of kin. Five years ago my cousin died;
he left no estate, but the title which had been maintained in honor by
my ancestors has descended to me, and when you marry Amy you will marry
a lord's daughter."

Desmond meditated a moment, and then said:

"I am satisfied to marry the daughter of plain Mr. Brooks."

"Thank you, my son, but I shall clear the estate, and for a season at
least dwell in the ancient halls of my ancestors. I will remain to
witness your marriage and shall then go home to England. And now comes
my last revelation: you and Amy are distantly connected; my remote
ancestors were yours also. Your grandfather came down from the younger
line a long time back, but blood as good as any one's flows in your
veins."

"Yes, from my mother."

"I admit it, _from your mother_."

Our readers know what followed. Amy and Desmond were married, and on
the night of the wedding he remarked to his father-in-law:

"This time I took no desperate chance."

"Neither did Amy when she intrusted her future happiness to you," came
the bright and elegant answer.

The whilom wizard tramp did return to England, and it was in the
ancestral halls that Desmond and Amy spent their delightful honeymoon.


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Desperate Chance
by Old Sleuth (Harlan P. Halsey)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DESPERATE CHANCE ***

***** This file should be named 10690.txt or 10690.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/6/9/10690/

Produced by Steven desJardins and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

