The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dick in the Desert, by James Otis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Dick in the Desert

Author: James Otis

Release Date: March 8, 2010 [EBook #31556]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DICK IN THE DESERT ***




Produced by David Edwards, Larry B. Harrison and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









[Illustration: DICK IN THE DESERT

James Otis]




  SUNSHINE LIBRARY.


  THE BLIND BROTHER.
    By Homer Greene                          $0.50

  THE CAPTAIN'S DOG.
    By Louis Énault                            .50

  DEAR LITTLE MARCHIONESS.
    The Story of a Child's Faith and Love      .50

  DICK IN THE DESERT.
    By James Otis                              .50

  THE GOLD THREAD.
    By Norman McLeod, D.D.                     .50

  HOW TOMMY SAVED THE BARN.
    By James Otis                              .50

  J. COLE.
    By Emma Gellibrand                         .50

  JESSICA'S FIRST PRAYER.
    By Hesba Stretton                          .50

  LADDIE.
    By the Author of "Miss Toosey's Mission"   .50

  LITTLE PETER.
    By Lucas Malet                             .50

  MASTER SUNSHINE.
    By Mrs. C. F. Fraser                        .50

  MISS TOOSEY'S MISSION.
    By the Author of "Laddie"                  .50

  MUSICAL JOURNEY OF DOROTHY AND DELIA.
    By Bradley Gilman                          .50

  A SHORT CRUISE.
    By James Otis                              .50

  THE WRECK OF THE CIRCUS.
    By James Otis                              .50

  THOMAS Y. CROWELL & COMPANY,
  NEW YORK AND BOSTON.




  DICK IN THE DESERT

  BY
  JAMES OTIS
  AUTHOR OF "HOW TOMMY SAVED THE BARN," ETC.

  NEW YORK: 46 EAST 14TH STREET
  THOMAS Y. CROWELL & COMPANY
  BOSTON: 100 PURCHASE STREET




  COPYRIGHT, 1893,
  BY THOMAS Y. CROWELL & COMPANY.

  TYPOGRAPHY BY C. J. PETERS & SON, BOSTON.

  PRESSWORK BY S. J. PARKHILL & CO.

[Illustration: "THANKS TO THE TIMELY ATTENTION, DICK SOON OPENED HIS
EYES."--Page 48.]




     For the lad to whom I have given the name of Dick Stevens this
     little story has been written, with the hope that he may enjoy
     the reading of it even as I did his modest manner of telling it.

                                        JAMES OTIS.




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER                       PAGE

    I. DICK'S DADDY                1

   II. A LONELY VIGIL             17

  III. A SAND-STORM               34

   IV. AT ANTELOPE SPRING         52

    V. DICK "PULLS THROUGH"       69




DICK IN THE DESERT.




CHAPTER I.

DICK'S DADDY.


Between Fox Peak and Smoke Creek Desert, on the western edge of the
State of Nevada, is a beautiful valley, carpeted with bunch grass,
which looks particularly bright and green to the venturesome traveller
who has just crossed either of the two deserts lying toward the east.

"Buffalo Meadows" the Indians named it, because of the vast herds of
American bison found there before the white men hunted simply for the
sport of killing; but those who halt at the last watercourse prior to
crossing the wide stretches of sand on the journey east, speak of it
as "Comfort Hollow."

To a travel-stained party who halted at the water-pool nearest the
desert on a certain afternoon in September two years ago, this last
name seemed particularly appropriate.

They had come neither for gold nor the sport of hunting; but were
wearily retracing their steps, after having wandered and suffered
among the foot-hills of the Sierras in a fruitless search for a home,
on which they had been lured by unscrupulous speculators.

Nearly two years previous Richard Stevens--"Roving Dick" his
acquaintances called him--had first crossed the vast plain of sand,
with his wife, son, and daughter.

His entire worldly possessions consisted of a small assortment of
household goods packed in a stout, long-bodied wagon, covered with
canvas stretched over five poles bent in a half-circle, and drawn by
two decrepit horses.

The journey had been a failure, so far as finding a home in the wilds
was concerned, where the head of the family could live without much
labor; and now the homeless ones, decidedly the worse for wear, were
returning to Willow Point, on the Little Humboldt River.

The provisions had long since been exhausted; the wagon rudely
repaired in many places; the cooking utensils were reduced to one pot
and a battered dipper; the canvas covering was torn and decaying, and
the horses presented a skeleton-like appearance.

The family had suffered outwardly quite as much as the goods. Young
Dick and his father wore clothing which had been patched and repatched
with anything Mrs. Stevens could push a needle through, until it would
have been impossible to say what was the original material; but to a
boy thirteen years of age this seemed a matter of little consequence,
while his father preferred such a costume rather than exert himself to
tan deer-hides for one more serviceable.

Mrs. Stevens and six-year-old Margie were in a less forlorn condition as
to garments; but they also needed a new outfit sadly, and nearly every
day young Dick told them confidentially that he would attend to the
matter immediately after arriving at Willow Point, even if it became
necessary for him to sell his rifle, the only article of value he owned.

"Once across the desert, mother," he said, as the sorry-looking team was
drawn up by the side of the pool, and he began to unharness the horses
while his father went in search of game for supper, "and then we shall
be well on our way to the old home we had no business to leave."

"It is this portion of the journey that worries me most, Dick. You
remember what a hard time we had when the animals were in good
condition; and now that they are hardly able to drag their own bones
along, the danger is great."

"No more than when we crossed the river; and even though father did
feel afraid there, we got along all right," was the cheerful reply.
"There should be plenty of game here, and after a square feed things
won't look so bad."

Mrs. Stevens turned wearily away to make preparations for the evening
meal in case the hunter should bring in a supply of meat, but made no
reply. She understood why young Dick spoke encouragingly, and felt proud
that the boy displayed so much tenderness for her; yet the fact could
not be disguised that dangers beset the little party on every hand.

It required but a small amount of labor in order to make ready for the
night.

Tired as the horses were, there was no likelihood of their straying
very far; and Dick simply removed the harness, allowing the animals to
roam at will. The wagon served as a camp; and the most arduous task
was that of gathering materials with which to make a fire, when
nothing larger than a bush could be seen on either hand.

Then there was no more to be done save await the return of the
hunter, and it was not until the shadows began to lengthen into the
gloom of night that young Dick felt seriously alarmed.

He knew his father would not have gone very far from the camp in
search of game, because he was on foot, and there was no more
promising place for sport than within the radius of a mile from where
they had halted. Besides, when hunting took the form of labor which
must be performed, Richard Stevens was not one who would continue it
long, unless he was remarkably hungry.

Young Dick's mother gave words to her anxiety several times; but the
boy argued with her that no harm could have befallen the absent one in
that vicinity, and for a time her fears were allayed.

When another hour passed, however, and nothing was heard from his
father, even Dick lost courage, and believed that the culminating
point in their troubles had been reached.

His mother and Margie had entered the wagon when night was fully come,
knowing they must go supperless to bed unless the hunter returned; and
to Dick the thought that these two whom he loved so dearly were
hungry, brought him almost as much sorrow as the unaccountable absence
of his father.

He believed, however, that it was his duty to appear unconcerned, as
if confident his father's prolonged absence did not betoken danger.
He trudged to and fro in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle, at
times whistling cheerily to show there was no trouble on his mind; and
again, when it was impossible to continue the melody because of the
sorrow in his heart, repeated to his mother that nothing serious could
have befallen the absent one, that probably he had unconsciously
wandered a long distance from the camp on the trail of game.

"It don't stand to reason he will try to make his way now it is dark,
mother dear; but within an hour or two after sunrise he'll be here, and
the breakfast we shall then have will make up for the loss of supper."

Mrs. Stevens made no reply; and listening a moment, Dick heard the
sound of suppressed sobs.

His mother was in distress, and he could do no more toward comforting
her than repeat what he did not absolutely believe.

He knew full well that unless some accident had befallen him, his
father would have returned before dark; that he would not have allowed
himself to be led so far away from the camping-place that he could not
readily return; and the boy's sorrow was all the greater because it
was impossible to console his mother.

Clambering into the wagon, he put his arms around her neck, pressing
his cheek close against hers, and during what seemed a very long while
the two remained silent, not daring to give words to their fears.

Then Dick bethought himself of a plan which offered some slight degree
of hope, and starting up suddenly, said,--

"I ought to have done it before, an' it ain't too late now."

"Done what, Dick dear?"

"Gone out in the direction father took, and fired the rifle two or
three times. It may be he has lost his bearings, and the report of the
gun would be enough to let him know where we are."

"But you must not go now that it is dark, my boy. Suppose you should
lose your way? Then what would become of Margie and me?"

"There's no danger of that, mother. I've been in the woods often
enough to be able to take care of myself, surely."

"Your father would have said the same thing when he set out; but yet
we know some accident must have befallen him."

"Let me go only a little way, mother."

"Of what avail would that be, my son? If the purpose is to discharge
your rifle, hoping father may hear the report, why not do it here?"

"I will, if you won't let me go farther."

"I can't, Dick dear. I might be braver under other circumstances, but
now the thought of your leaving me is more than I can bear."

"I won't go so far but that I can see the wagon," Dick said, kissing
his mother and little Margie much as though bidding them good-by; and
a few moments later the report of his rifle almost startled the
occupants of the wagon.

During the next hour Dick discharged his weapon at least twelve times,
but there was no reply of whatsoever nature.

If his father was alive and within hearing, he was too badly disabled
to give token of his whereabouts.

The supply of cartridges was not so large that very many could be used
without making a serious inroad upon the store; and realizing the
uselessness of further efforts in this direction, Dick went back to
the wagon.

Margie had fallen asleep, her head pillowed in her mother's lap; and
Mrs. Stevens, unwilling to disturb the child, was taking such rest as
was possible while she leaned against the canvas covering of the wagon.

Dick seated himself beside her. It was not necessary he should speak
of his failure, for she knew that already.

He had thought it his duty to join her for a few moments, and then go
outside again to act the part of sentinel, although such labor could
be of little avail; but before he had been nestling by her side five
minutes his eyes were closed in slumber; and the mother, her mind
reaching out to the absent father, spent the hours of the night in
wakefulness, watching over her children.

The sun had risen before Dick's eyes were opened; and springing to his
feet quickly, ashamed of having slept while his mother kept guard, he
said,--

"I didn't mean to hang on here like a baby while you were awake,
mother, but my eyes shut before I knew it."

"It is well you rested, my son. Nothing could have been done had you
remained awake."

"Perhaps not; but I should have felt better, because if anything has
happened to father, though I don't say it can be possible, I'm the one
who must take care of you and Margie."

Mrs. Stevens kissed the boy, not daring to trust herself to speak; and
he hurried out, for there was before him a full day's work, if he would
do that which he had decided upon in his mind the evening previous.

There was no reasonable hope any one would come that way for many
days--perhaps months.

They were alone, and whatever was done must be accomplished by this
thirteen-year-old boy.

"I'm going after something for breakfast, mother, and then count on
trying to follow father's trail," Dick said, after looking around in
every direction, even though he knew there was no possibility of
seeing any human being.

"There is no reason why you should spend the time in trying to get
food for us, Dick dear. Margie and I can get on very well without
breakfast, and you will have the more time to hunt for your father;
but remember, my boy, that you are the only one we can depend upon
now, and without you we might remain here until we starved."

"I'll take good care not to go so far from the wagon but that I can
find my way back; for surely I'll be able to follow on my own trail,
if there's no other. Hadn't I better do a little hunting first?"

"Not unless you are very, very hungry, Dick. Food would choke me just
now, and there is enough of the bread we baked yesterday morning to
give you and Margie an apology for a breakfast."

"I can get along without; you shall eat my share. Now, don't worry if
I'm not back until near sunset. The horses are close at hand, and you
may be certain they won't stray while the feed is plentiful. Stay in
the wagon, even though there is nothing to harm you if you walk
around. We must be careful that no more trouble comes upon us; so keep
under cover, mother dear, and I'll be here again before night comes."

Dick was not as confident he could follow his father's trail as he
would have it appear to his mother; but he decided upon the direction
in which he would search, and set bravely out heading due west,
knowing he could hold such a course by aid of the sun's position, as
his father had often explained to him.

Dick was hungry, but scorned to let his mother know it, and tried to
dull the edge of his appetite by chewing twigs and blades of grass.

After walking rapidly ten minutes, more careful as to direction than
he ever had been, because of the responsibility that rested upon him,
he stopped and shouted his father's name; then listened, hoping to
hear a reply.

Save for the hum of insect life, no sound came to his anxious ears.

Once more he pressed forward, and again shouted, but without avail.

He continued on until, seeing the trail made by the wagon when they
had come in from the stream, he knew he was very near to the border of
the valley.

Surely his father would not have gone outside, because he had said
before they arrived that only in the Buffalo Meadows were they likely
to find game.

Then Dick turned, pushing on in a northerly direction at right angles
with the course he had just been pursuing, and halting at five-minute
intervals to shout.

His anxiety and hunger increased equally as the day grew older. Try as
he might, he could not keep the tears from over-running his eyelids.

The sun was sinking toward the west before he heard aught of human
voice save his own; and then a cry of joy and relief burst from his
lips as he heard faintly in the distance his own name spoken.

"I'm coming! I'm coming!" he cried at the full strength of his lungs,
as he dashed forward, exultant in the thought that his father was
alive, for he had begun to believe that he would never see him again
in this world.

Mr. Stevens continued to call out now and then to guide the boy on the
way, and as he drew nearer Dick understood from the quavering tones
that his father was in agony.

"I'm coming, daddy! I'm coming!" he shouted yet louder, as if
believing it was necessary to animate the sufferer, for he now knew
that some painful accident had befallen his father; and when he
finally ended the search his heart literally ceased beating because of
his terror and dismay.

Dick believed he had anticipated the worst, but yet was unprepared for
that which he saw.

Lying amid the blood-stained sage-grass, his shirt stripped into
bandages to tie up a grievously injured limb, lay "Roving Dick," his
face pallid, his lips bloodless, and his general appearance that of
one whom death has nearly overtaken.

"Daddy! daddy!" Dick cried piteously, and then he understood that
consciousness had deserted the wounded man.

He had retained possession of his faculties until aid was near at
hand, and then the long strain of physical and mental agony had
brought about a collapse.

Dick raised his father's head tenderly, imploring him to speak--to
tell him what should be done; but the injured man remained silent as
if death had interposed to give him relief.

Looking about scrutinizingly, as those born and bred on the frontier
learn to do early in life, Dick saw his father's rifle twenty feet or
more away, and between it and him a trail of blood through the
sage-brush, then a sinister, crimson blotch on the sand.

Mr. Stevens's right leg was the injured member, and it had been
wrapped so tightly with the improvised bandages that the boy could
form no idea as to the extent of the wound; but he knew it must indeed
be serious to overcome so thoroughly one who, though indolent by
nature, had undergone much more severe suffering than he could have
known since the time of leaving the wagon to search for game.

It seemed to Dick as if more than ten minutes elapsed before his
father spoke, and then it was to ask for water.

He might as well have begged for gold, so far as Dick's ability to
gratify the desire was concerned.

"To get any, daddy, I may have to go way back to the wagon, for I
haven't come upon a single watercourse since leaving camp this morning."

"Your mother and Margie?"

"I left them at the camp. How did you get here?"

"It was just before nightfall. I had been stalking an antelope; was
crawling on the ground dragging my rifle, when the hammer must have
caught amid the sage-brush; the weapon was discharged, and the bone of
my leg appears to be shattered."

"Poor, poor daddy!" and Dick kissed him on the forehead.

"We must be four miles from the camp," Mr. Stevens said, speaking with
difficulty because of his parched and swollen tongue.

"I should say so; but I went toward the west, and after travelling
until noon struck across this way, so have no idea of the distance."

"I shall die for lack of water, Dick, even though the wound does not
kill me."

"How shall I get it, daddy?" the boy cried piteously. "I can't leave
you here alone, and I don't believe there's a drop nearer than where
we are camped."

"You _must_ leave me, Dick; for you can do no good while staying here,
and the thought that help is coming, even though there may be many
hours to wait, will give me strength. Can you find your way to the
camp and back after nightfall?"

"I'll do it somehow, daddy! I'll do it!"

"Then set out at once, and bring one of the horses back with you. I
should be able to ride four miles, or even twice that distance, since
it is to save my life."

"But you'll keep up a brave heart, daddy dear, won't you? Don't think
you are going to die; but remember that mother and I, and even little
Margie, will do all we can to pull you through."

"I know it, Dick, I know it. You are a good lad--far better than I
have been father; and if it should chance that when you come back I've
gone from this world, remember that you are the only one to whom the
mother and baby can look for protection."

"You know I'd always take care of them; but I am going to save you,
daddy dear. People have gotten over worse wounds than this, and once
you are at the camp we will stay in Buffalo Meadows till it is
possible for you to ride. I'll look out for the whole outfit, and from
this on you sha'n't have a trouble, except because of the wound."

"Give me your hand, my boy, and now go; for strong as may be my will,
I can't stand the loss of much more blood. God bless you, Dick, and
remember that I always loved you, even though I never provided for you
as a father should have done."

Dick hastily cleared the mist from his eyes, and without speaking
darted forward in the direction where he believed the wagon would be
found, breaking the sage-brush as he ran in order that he might make
plain the trail over which he must return.




CHAPTER II.

A LONELY VIGIL.


It was not yet dark when Dick arrived within sight of the wagon, and
shouted cheerily that those who were so anxiously awaiting his coming
might know he had been fortunate in the search.

As soon as his voice rang out, startlingly loud because of the almost
oppressive stillness, Mrs. Stevens appeared from beneath the flap of
the canvas covering, and an expression of most intense disappointment
passed over her face as she saw that Dick was alone.

"It's all right, mother!" he cried, quickening his pace that she might
the sooner be relieved from her suspense. "It's all right!"

"Did you find your father?"

"Yes; an' I've come back for one of the horses. He's been hurt, an'
can't walk."

"Thank God he is alive!" she cried, and then for the first time since
the previous evening she gave way to tears.

Dick did all he could toward comforting her without making any delay
in setting out on the return journey.

While he filled the canteen with fresh water he repeated what his
father had bidden him to say; and when his mother asked concerning the
wound, he spoke as if he did not consider it serious.

"Of course it's bad, for he thinks one of the bones has been splintered;
but I don't see why he shouldn't come 'round all right after a spell.
We've known of people who had worse hurts and yet got well."

"But they were where at least something of what might be needed could
be procured, while we are here in the desert."

"Not quite so bad as that, mother dear. We have water, and I should be
able to get food in plenty. After I've supplied the camp, I'm goin' on
foot to Antelope Spring, where we can buy whatever daddy may need."

"Across the desert alone!"

"A boy like me ought to be able to do it, and"--

"Your father hasn't a penny, Dick dear."

"I know that, mother; but I'll sell my rifle before he shall suffer for
anything. Now don't worry, and keep up a good heart till I come back."

"Can't I be of some assistance if I go too?"

"You'd better stay here with Margie. Father and I can manage it alone,
I reckon."

Then Dick set about catching one of the horses; and as he rode the
sorry-looking steed up to the wagon, his mother gave him such articles
from her scanty store as the wounded man might need.

"You're a good boy, Dick," she said, as he stooped over to kiss her;
"and some day you shall have your reward."

"I'll get it now, mother, if I see you looking a little more jolly;
and indeed things ain't quite so bad as they seem, for I can pull our
little gang through in great shape, though I'm afraid after it's been
done I sha'n't be able to get you and Margie the new outfit I promised."

"We should be so thankful your father is alive as not to realize that
we need anything else."

"But you do, just the same, whether you realize it or not; an' I'll
attend to everything if I have time enough. Don't trouble yourself if
we're not back much before morning, for I reckon daddy can't stand it
to ride faster than a walk."

Then, without daring to stop longer, lest he should betray some sign
of weakness, Dick rode away, waving his hand to Margie, who was
looking out of the rear end of the wagon, but giving vent to a sigh
which was almost a sob when they could no longer see him.

Young though he was, Dick understood full well all the dangers which
menaced. Although he had spoken so confidently of being able to "pull
the gang through," he knew what perils were before them during the
journey across the desert; and it must be made within a reasonably
short time, otherwise they might be overtaken by the winter storms
before arriving at their old home.

The beast he rode, worn by long travelling and scanty fare, could not
be forced to a rapid pace; and when night came Dick was hardly more
than two miles from the wagon.

He could have walked twice the distance in that time; but the delay
was unavoidable, since only on the horse's back could his father be
brought into camp.

When it was so dark that he could not see the broken sage-brush which
marked the trail, it was necessary he should dismount, and proceed even
at a slower pace; but he continued to press forward steadily, even
though slowly, until, when it seemed to him that the night was well-nigh
spent, he heard a sound as of moaning a short distance in advance.

"I've come at last, daddy. It's been a terrible long while, I know;
but it was the best I could"--

He ceased speaking very suddenly as he stood by the side of the
sufferer, whom he could dimly see by the faint light of the stars.

From the broken and uprooted sage-brush around him, it was evident the
wounded man had, most likely while in a delirium of fever, attempted
to drag himself on in the direction of the camp, and had ceased such
poor efforts only when completely exhausted.

He was lying on his back, looking straight up at the sky as he
alternately moaned and talked at random, with now and then a mirthless
laugh which frightened the boy.

"Don't, daddy, don't!" he begged, as he raised the sufferer's head.
"See, it's Dick come back; and now you can ride into camp!"

"Mother is dying of thirst, and I'm--see that stream! Come, boys,
we'll take a header into it--I'm on fire--fire!"

Frightened though he was, Dick knew water was the one thing his father
most needed; and laying the poor head gently back on the sand, he took
the canteen from a bag which had served instead of a saddle.

"Drink this, daddy, and you'll feel better," he said coaxingly, much
as if speaking to a child.

The wounded man seized the tin vessel eagerly, and it required all
Dick's strength to prevent him from draining it at once.

"I'm afraid to give you more now, my poor old man; but wait, like a
dear, and I'll let you take it again when you're on the horse."

Not until after a violent struggle, which frightened Dick because it
seemed almost as if he was raising his hand against his father, did he
regain possession of the canteen, and then a full half of the contents
had been consumed.

When his thirst was in a measure quenched, Mr. Stevens lay quietly on
the sand, save now and then as he moaned in unconscious agony, heeding
not the boy's pleading words.

"Try to help yourself a bit, daddy," he urged. "If you'll stand on one
foot I can manage to lift you onto the horse's back."

Again and again did Dick try by words to persuade his father to do as
he desired, and then he realized how useless were his efforts.

He had heard of this delirium which often follows neglect of gun-shot
wounds, but had no idea how he should set about checking it.

After understanding that words were useless, and knowing full well he
could not lift unaided such a weight onto the horse's back, he
crouched by his father's side in helpless grief.

Never before had he known what it was to be afraid, however far he might
be from others of his kind; but now, as he listened to the meaningless
words, or the piteous moans, terror took possession of him, and the soft
sighing of the gentle wind sounded in his ears like a menace.

The horse strayed here and there seeking food, but he gave no heed.

Such garments as his mother had given him, Dick spread over the
sufferer; and that done there was nothing for him save to wait.

It seemed to the anxious boy as if the night would never end. Now and
then he rose to his feet, scanning the eastern sky in the hope of
seeing some signs of coming dawn; but the light of the stars had not
faded, and he knew the morning was yet far away.

Finally, when it seemed to him as if he could no longer remain idle
listening to a strong man's childish prattle, the eastern heavens were
lighted by a dull glow, which increased steadily until he could see
the horse feeding on the dry bunch-grass an hundred yards away, and
his long vigil was nearly at an end.

His father called for water from time to time, and Dick had given him
to drink from the canteen till no more than a cupful remained.

Now he asked again, but in a voice which sounded more familiar; and a
great hope sprang up in the boy's heart as he said,--

"There's only a little left, you poor old man, and we can't get more
this side the camp. Shall I give it to you now?"

"Let me moisten my lips, Dick dear. They are parched, and my tongue is
swollen until it seems ready to burst."

Dick handed him the canteen; and his father drank sparingly, in marked
contrast to his greedy swallowing of a few moments previous.

"It tastes sweet, my boy; and when we are at the camp I'll need only
to look at the brook in order to get relief. Are you soon going for
the horse?"

"I went, an' have got back, daddy dear. You've been talking mighty
queer--on account of the wound, I suppose."

"How long have you been with me, child?"

"I must have got here before midnight, and the morning is just coming
now."

"You're a good boy, Dick."

"That's what mother said before I left, and between the two of you I'm
afraid you'll make me out way beyond what I deserve. We must get back
as soon as we can, you poor old man; for she'll be crying her eyes
sore with thinking we've both knocked under. Will we have a try at
getting on horseback?"

"Yes; and I reckon it can be done. Lead the beast up here, and then
help me on my feet--I've grown as weak as a baby, Dick."

"And I don't wonder at it. According to the looks of this sage-brush
you must have lost half of all the blood you had at this time
yesterday."

Now that his father was conscious once more, all Dick's reasonless
terror fled, and again he was the manly fellow he had always shown
himself to be.

The horse was led to Mr. Stevens's side; and Dick raised the nearly
powerless body until, at the expense of most severe pain, but without
sign of it by even so much as a groan, his father stood on the
uninjured limb.

Fortunately the horse was too weary to make much protest at what
followed; with a restive steed it would have been impossible for the
boy to half lift, half push his father up until he was seated on the
bag that served as saddle.

"How is it now, you poor old man? Can you hold on there a couple of
hours?"

"I must, my boy; and if it so be I show signs of losing my reason
again, you must contrive to lash me here, for unless this wound is
attended to in better shape than it is just now, I'll go under."

"For mother's sake you must keep a good grip on yourself. It'll come
tough, I know; but once we're in camp you shall live on the fat of the
land."

Dick took up his father's rifle,--his own he had left in the wagon when
he went after the horse,--and, leading the animal by the bridle, marched
on, glancing back every few seconds to learn how the rider was faring.

Although he struggled to repress any evidence of pain, Mr. Stevens
could not prevent the agony from being apparent on his face; and Dick,
who had neither eaten nor slept during the past twenty-four hours, did
all a boy could have done to cheer the sufferer, without thought of
his own necessities.

"We'll soon be in camp, daddy, when you're to have everything you
need," he said from time to time; and then, fancying this was not
sufficient encouragement, he finally added, "you know I'm going over
to Antelope Spring to get some doctor's stuff as soon as I've found
game enough to keep the camp supplied while I'm away."

"Antelope Spring!" Mr. Stevens cried, aroused from his suffering for an
instant by the bold assertion. "You shall never do it, Dick, not if I
had twenty wounds! It's as much as a man's life is worth to cross the
desert on foot, and these horses of ours are worse than none at all."

"By the time we've been in camp a couple of weeks where the feed is
good, they'll pick up in great shape, and be fit to haul the old wagon
home. Won't it be prime to see the town once more? And there'll be no
more hunting 'round for a place where we can get a livin' easy, eh,
daddy?"

"No, Dickey; once we're there we'll stay, and I'm going to turn over a
new leaf if my life is spared. I'll do more work and less loafing. But
you're not to cross the desert alone, my boy."

"It may be travellers will come our way, an' I can go with them," Dick
replied, taking good care not to make any promises; for he understood
from what his mother had said that it would be absolutely necessary
that aid should be had from the nearest settlement.

Fortunately, as it then seemed to the boy, the pain which his father
was enduring prevented him from dwelling upon the subject; and as Dick
trudged on, trying to force the horse into a more rapid gait, he
turned over in his mind all he had heard regarding such a journey.

There were many times when it seemed certain Mr. Stevens must succumb
to the suffering caused by the wound; but he contrived to "keep a
good grip" on himself, as Dick had suggested, and after what seemed
the longest and most painful journey the boy had ever experienced, the
two came upon landmarks which told they were nearing the encampment.

His father was ghastly pale. The big drops of sweat on his forehead
told of intense pain; and, in order to revive his courage yet a little
longer, Dick shouted loudly to warn the dear ones who were waiting.

"They'll soon come running to meet us; and you must put on a bold
front, daddy, else mother will think you're near dead. Hold hard a
little while longer, and then we'll have you in the wagon, where all
hands of us can doctor you in great shape."

It is more than probable that, had he been alone, with no one to cheer
him, Mr. Stevens might never have been able to endure the agony which
must have been his. Thanks to Dick's cheering words, however, he not
only kept his seat, but remained conscious until his wife and son
lifted him from the horse to the bed hastily prepared in the vehicle.

Then nature asserted herself; and he speedily sank into unconsciousness
accompanied by delirium, as when Dick had watched by his side.

"He was just that way all night, and it frightened me, mother. What
can we do for him?"

"I don't know, Dick dear; indeed I don't. Unless he can have proper
attention death must soon come, and I am ignorant of such nursing as
he needs. If we were only where we could call in a doctor!"

"Wouldn't it do almost as well if we had medicine for him?"

"Perhaps so; but if we could get such things it would also be possible
to at least find out what we should do."

"The horses wouldn't pull us across the desert until after they've
rested a spell," Dick said half to himself.

"And even if they could, we must have food."

"See here, mother; you fix up daddy's leg the best you know how, and
I'll look around for something that'll fill the pot. There are rabbits
here in plenty, though it's mighty hard luck when you have to waste a
cartridge on each one. I'll have enough in the way of meat by the time
you've washed the wound. I've heard the poor old man himself say that
plenty of cool water was needed on a bullet-hole."

Mrs. Stevens could not be hopeful under the circumstances, for she knew
better than did Dick how slight was the chance that the injured man
could live where it was impossible to care properly for the wound; but
she would not deprive the boy of hope, and turned to do as he suggested.

Although weary and footsore, Dick did not spend many moments in camp.

He waited only long enough to get his rifle and ammunition, and then
trudged off; for meat must be had, even at the expense of cartridges,
both for the wounded man and the remainder of the family.

An hour later Dick returned with two rabbits; and when these had been
made ready for cooking, he clambered into the wagon to see his father.

The invalid looked more comfortable, even though nothing had been done
for his relief save to cleanse the wound, and dress it in such fashion
as was possible; but he was still in the delirium, and after kissing
the pale forehead, Dick went to where his mother was making ready for
the long-delayed meal.

"I don't reckon there's a bit of anything to eat, mother?"

"I shall soon have these rabbits cooked."

"But I must be off after larger game, and don't want to wait till
dinner is ready."

"You need the food, Dickey, and there is only a tiny bit of bread."

"Give me that, mother dear. It will stop the hole in my stomach for a
spell, and when I come back there'll be plenty of time to eat meat."

Had the circumstances been one whit less grave, Mrs. Stevens would not
have consented to his setting out before having eaten a hearty meal;
but she knew that more meat would soon be needed, since they had no
other food, and two rabbits would hardly provide the famishing ones
with enough to stay their hunger for the time being.

The piece of bread, baked the day previous from the last of their
store of flour, was brought out; and, munching it slowly that it might
seem to be more, Dick started off again.

Not until nearly nightfall did he return; but he had with him such
portion of a deer's carcass as he could drag, and all fear of
starvation was banished from camp.

The wounded man was resting more comfortably, if such term can be
applied properly when one is suffering severest pain; and after
hanging the meat beneath the wagon, Dick questioned his mother as to
what might be done if they were within reach of a physician.

"If we could see one, Dickey, your father's life might be saved, for
such a wound should not be exceedingly dangerous. If I knew how to
treat it, and had the proper washes, we ought to nurse him back to
life; but as it is, I haven't even that which would check the fever."

"If you could talk to a doctor would it be all right?"

"I believe so, Dickey."

"Would the medecine you want cost very much?"

"It is the same to us whether the price be much or little, since we
haven't the opportunity to get what is needed, nor the money with
which to pay for it if a shop were near at hand."

Dick ceased his questioning, and set about performing such work around
the camp as might well have been left undone until the next day.

A generous supply of broiled venison was made ready, and the boy ate
heartily; after which he went into the wagon, telling his mother he
would play the part of nurse until dark, when she could take his place.

Once in the vehicle, partially screened from view, Dick, after much
search for the bit of a lead-pencil his father owned, wrote on a piece
of brown paper that had contained the last ten pounds of flour Mr.
Stevens had purchased, the following words,--

     DEAR MOTHER,--I know you won't let me go to Antelope Spring if I
     tell you about what I'm minded to do, so I shall slip off the
     first thing in the morning. I'll take my rifle with me, and by
     selling it, get what stuff daddy needs. I can talk with a doctor
     too; and when I come back we'll fix the poor old man up in great
     shape.

     Don't worry about me, for I can get across without any bother.
     I'm going to take the canteen and some slices of meat, so I
     sha'n't be hungry or thirsty. I count on being back in three
     days; but if I'm gone five you mustn't think anything has gone
     wrong, for it may be a longer trip than I'm reckonin' on.

     I love you, and daddy, and Margie mighty well; and this footing
     it across the desert ain't half as dangerous as you think for.

                                        Your son,

                                             DICKEY.

When this had been done, he kissed his father twice, smoothed the hair
back from the pale, damp forehead, and whispered,--

"I'm going so's you'll get well, my poor old man; and you mustn't make
any kick, 'cause it's _got_ to be done."

Then he came out as if tired of playing the nurse, and proposed that
he sleep under the wagon that night.

"With all hands inside, daddy would be crowded; and I'm as well off
out-of-doors. Kiss me, mother, for I'm mighty tired."




CHAPTER III.

A SAND-STORM.


In this proposal to retire thus early Mrs. Stevens saw nothing to
excite her suspicions regarding Dick's real intentions.

He had worked for thirty-six hours almost incessantly; and it would
not be strange if this unusual exertion, together with the weariness
caused by excitement, had brought him to the verge of exhaustion.

His mother would have insisted upon bringing out one of the well-worn
blankets, but that Dick was decidedly opposed to taking anything from
the wagon which might in the slightest degree contribute to his
father's comfort.

"I'm very well off on the bare ground, and with the wagon to shelter
me from the dew I couldn't be better fixed. Our poor old man needs all
we've got, mother; and you may be sure I won't lay awake thinking of
the feather-beds we had at Willow Point, 'cause it's about as much as
I can do to keep my eyes open."

"You are a dear good boy, and God will reward you. In addition to
saving your father's life, for that is what you've done this day, you
have lightened my burden until it would be wicked to repine."

"I'll risk your ever doing anything very wicked, mother; and if the
time comes when it seems to you as though I don't do exactly as you
want me to, just remember all you've said about my being a good boy,
an' let it be a stand-off, will you?"

"I am certain you will never do anything to cause me sorrow, Dickey,
dear. Don't get up until you have been thoroughly rested; for now that
we have food in camp, I can do all that will be necessary."

Then Dick's mother kissed him again, not leaving him until he had
stretched out at full length under the wagon; and so tired was the boy
that Mrs. Stevens had hardly got back to take up her duties as nurse
when his loud breathing told that he was asleep.

When Dick awakened it was still dark; but he believed, because he no
longer felt extremely weary, that the night was nearly spent; and for
the success of his plan it was of the utmost importance he should set
out before his mother was astir.

It was his purpose to travel on foot to Antelope Spring, a distance in
an air-line of about forty-five miles, fifteen of which would be
across the upper portion of Smoke Creek Desert.

In this waste of sand lay all the danger of the undertaking. The
number of miles to be travelled troubled him but little, for more than
once had he walked nearly as far in a single day while hunting; and he
proposed to spend thirty-six hours on each stage of the journey.

Creeping cautiously out from under the wagon, he fastened his letter
to the flap of the canvas covering in such a manner that his mother
could not fail to see it when she first came out; and then he wrapped
in leaves several slices of broiled venison, after which he stowed
them in his pocket.

The canteen was filled at a spring near-by.

He saw to it that his ammunition belt contained no more than half a
dozen cartridges, and then took up his rifle, handling it almost
lovingly; for this, his only valuable possession, he intended to part
with in order to secure what might be necessary for his father's
relief and comfort.

The weapon was slung over his back where it would not impede his
movements; and with a single glance backward he set out with a long,
swinging stride such as he knew by experience he could maintain for
many hours.

It was still dark when he had crossed the fertile meadows, and arrived
at the border of an apparently limitless expanse of yellow sand.

Here it would not be possible to maintain the pace at which he had
started, because of the loose sand in which his feet sank to the depth
of an inch at each step.

Having set out at such an early hour, this boy, who was perilling his
life in the hope of aiding his father, believed the more dangerous
portion of the journey might be accomplished before the heat of the
day should be the most severe.

When the sun rose Dick had travelled, as nearly as he could estimate,
over three miles of desert; and his courage increased with the
knowledge that one-fifth of the distance across the sands had already
been traversed.

At the end of the next hour he said to himself that he must be nearly
midway on the road of sand; and although the labor of walking was most
severe, his heart was very light.

"Once across, I'll push on as fast as any fellow can walk," he said
aloud, as if the sound of his own voice gave him cheer. "By making an
extra effort I ought to be in Antelope Spring before midnight, and
have plenty of time to sleep between now and morning. Half a day there
to sell the rifle, an' buy what is needed, an' by sunset I should be
at the edge of the desert again, ready to make this part of the tramp
after dark."

He walked quickly, and like one who intends to go but a short distance.

The forty-five-mile tramp seemed to him but a trifle as compared with
what was to be gained by the making of it.

He thought of his mother as she read the note he had left on the flap
of the wagon-covering, and wondered if she looked upon his departure
as an act of disobedience, which, in fact, it was, since both his
parents had insisted he should not attempt it.

Then his thoughts went out to his father, and he told over in his mind
all the questions he would ask of the doctor at Antelope Spring; for
he had no doubt but that he should find one of that profession there.

He took little heed to the monotonous view around him, until suddenly he
saw in the distance what appeared to be a low-hanging cloud; then he
said to himself that if a shower should spring up the sun's face would
be covered, and the heat, which was now very great, must be lessened.

As this cloud advanced, descending to the sands while it rose toward
the heavens, it grew more black; and on either side were long columns
of seeming vapor rising, and as rapidly disappearing.

Then across the darkness on that portion of the horizon something
bright moved swiftly, as if a flash of lightning had passed over the
face of the cloud; and in an instant the sun and the sky were shut out
from view.

Now the clouds took on the appearance of a dense black fog, coming up
from the southward over the desert, until Dick was seemingly looking
at a gigantic wall, over the face of which shone now and then bright
flashes of light.

There was a shrieking and moaning in the air, so it seemed to the
startled boy; and he failed to understand the meaning of this strange
scene, until, the impenetrable wall having come so near, he could see
that what appeared like flashes of light were gigantic columns of sand
springing high in the air with fantastic shapes, and glinted by the
sun from above the apparent vapor, until they were swallowed up in the
enormous bank of cloud behind them.

Then it was Dick knew the meaning of this terrible danger which
threatened him.

It was a storm of sand. "Dancing giants" some have termed it, and
others speak of it as the "hot blizzard."

As if in an instant the dancing, swirling columns and the rushing
cloud of sand, which swayed to and fro in fantastic movements,
surrounded him.

He was in the centre of a cyclone freighted with particles of sand.

The wind roared until one might have believed he heard the crash of
thunder.

Dick halted, terrified, bewildered; and as he came to a standstill, it
seemed to him that the clouds on every hand lowered until he could see
the blue sky above. Then with a shriek from the wind the very sand
beneath his feet rose and fell like billows of the sea.

The tempest was upon him.

He shielded his eyes with his arm; but the stinging, heated particles
sought out every inch of his body, and his clothing afforded but
little protection.

The sand penetrated his ears and nostrils, and burned his lips until
they bled.

He had heard it said that to remain motionless in such a tempest means
death; for wherever the wind meets with an obstruction, there it piles
the sand in huge mounds, and his father had told of more than one
hunter who had thus been buried alive.

It was death to remain motionless, and yet to move seemed impossible.

Whether he turned to the right or the left the whirlwind struck him
with a fury which it was difficult to withstand. It was as if the wind
swept in upon him from every point of the compass--as if he was the
centre of this whirling, dancing, blinding, murderous onrush of sand.

The boy's throat was dry. He was burning with thirst.

The dust-laden air seemed to have literally filled his lungs, and it
was with difficulty he could breathe.

Despite the protection he sought to give, his eyes were inflamed, and
the lids cruelly swollen.

He sank ankle-deep at every step, and above him and around him the
wild blasts shrieked, until there were times when he feared lest he
should be thrown from his feet.

Pulling his hat down over his aching eyes, the bewildered, terrified
boy tried to gain some relief from the thirst which assailed him.

He understood that the contents of his canteen must be guarded
jealously; for if he lived there were still several miles of the
desert journey to be traversed, and the walking would be even more
difficult than before the storm set in, because of the shifting sand.

His distress rendered him reckless; and regardless of the future, he
drank fully half the water in the canteen, bathing his eyes with a
small quantity poured in the hollow of his hand.

It would have been better if he had not tried to find relief by this
last method, for the flying particles of sand adhered to such portions
of his face as were wet, forming a coating over the skin almost
instantly.

He attempted to brush it off, and the gritty substance cut into his
flesh as if he had rubbed it with emery-paper.

Then came into Dick's mind the thought that he should never more see
his parents on this earth, and for the instant his courage so far
deserted him that he was on the point of flinging himself face
downward upon the sand.

Fortunately there appeared before his mental vision a picture of his
father lying in the wagon with the certainty that death would come
unless his son could bring relief, and this nerved the boy to yet
greater exertion.

With his arms over his face, he pushed forward once more, not knowing
whether he might be retracing his steps, or proceeding in the proper
direction.

Every inch of advance was made against the fierce wind and drifting
sand which nearly overthrew him.

Every breath he drew was choked with dust.

How long he thus literally fought against the elements it was
impossible for him so much as to conjecture.

He knew his strength was spending rapidly; and when it seemed as if he
could not take another step, he stumbled, and fell against a mound of
sand.

It had been built by the "dancing giants" when some obstruction had
been found in the path of the storm; and as Dick fell prostrate at the
foot of this slight elevation, there instantly came a sense of deepest
relief.

The sand was no longer thrown against him by the blast; the wind had
ceased to buffet him; he was in comparative quiet, and for an instant
he failed to understand the reason.

Then he realized that this mound, which had thrown him from his feet,
was affording a shelter against the tempest, which was now coming from
one direction instead of in a circle as heretofore; and a fervent
prayer of thanksgiving went up from his heart, for he believed his
life had been saved that he might aid his father.

After recovering in a measure from the exhaustion consequent upon his
battle with the elements, he proceeded with infinite care to brush the
particles of sand from his face; and this done, his relief was yet
greater.

Overhead the air was full of darkness; the wind still screamed as it
whirled aloft the spiral columns of dust; the wave-like drift of the
sand surged on either side; but for the moment he was safe.

He had been told that such tempests were of but short duration, and
yet it seemed to him as if already half a day had been spent in this
fight for life.

Then he said to himself that he could remain where he was in safety
until the wind had subsided; but even as the words were formed in his
mind he was conscious of a weight upon his limbs as if something was
bearing him down, and for the first time he realized that he was being
rapidly buried alive.

To remain where he was ten minutes longer must be fatal; and perhaps
even that length of time would not be allowed him, for if the wind so
shifted as to cut off the top of the mound, then he would be
overwhelmed as if in a landslide.

There was nothing for it but to go into the conflict once more; and in
this second effort the odds would be still greater against him,
because his courage was lessened.

He knew the danger which menaced, and the suffering he would have to
endure the instant he rose from behind the poor shelter; yet it was
necessary, and the boy staggered to his feet.

There was nothing to guide him in the right direction, for all around
was blackness and flying grit; yet he believed his way lay directly in
the teeth of the storm, and because of such belief pressed onward,
resolving that he would continue as long as was possible.

As he said to himself so he did, staggering this way and that, but
ever pressing forward on the course which he believed to be the true
one, blinded, choking, bewildered by the swirling particles until he
was dimly conscious of falling, and then he knew no more.

At the moment Dick fell vanquished, hardly more than a quarter of a
mile distant were two men mounted on Indian ponies, and leading three
burros laden with a miner's outfit for prospecting.

To them the sand-storms of the desert were not strange; and with the
knowledge born of experience they made preparations for "riding out the
gale," when the low, dark cloud first appeared in the eastern horizon.

The animals were fastened with their heads together; the riders
bending forward in the saddles, and, as well as it could be
accomplished, throwing over all the heads a number of blankets.

The two horsemen had taken the precaution while assuming this position
to present their backs to the wind, and each had tied one end of his
blanket around his waist in such manner that it could not be stripped
off by the tempest.

Two or three blankets were fastened to the heads of the animals, and
thus the faces of all were protected.

When the sand had whirled around them until the animals were buried
nearly to their bellies, the riders forced the bunch onward ten or
fifteen paces, continuing to make this change of location at least
every five minutes during the entire time the tempest raged; and thus
it was they escaped being buried in the downpour of sand.

From the time the first blast struck Dick, until the "dancing giants"
whirled away to the westward, leaving the sky unclouded and the yellow
sands shimmering in the sunlight, no more than thirty minutes had
passed; yet in that short interval one human life on which others
depended would have been sacrificed, unless these two travellers who
were uninjured should chance to reach that exact spot where lay the
boy partially covered by the desert's winding-sheet.

"You can talk of a gale at sea where the sailors are half drowned all
the time; but it ain't a marker alongside of these 'ere red-hot
blizzards, eh, Parsons?" one of the horsemen said as he threw off the
blanket from his head with a long-drawn sigh of relief.

"Drownin' must be mighty pleasant kind of fun alongside of chokin' to
death on account of bein' filled plum full with dry sand," Parsons
replied. "I allow there ain't no call for us to stay here braggin'
about our Nevada hurricanes, Tom Robinson, more especially since we'll
make less headway now the sand has been stirred up a bit."

"There's nothin' to hold me here," Robinson replied with a laugh.

Straightway the two men turned their ponies' heads toward the west;
and as they advanced the patient burros, laden with a miscellaneous
assortment of goods until little else than their heads and tails could
be seen, followed steadily in the rear.

Five minutes after they had resumed their journey Parsons cried, as he
raised himself in the stirrups, shading his eyes with his hands as he
peered ahead,--

"What's that 'ere bit of blue out there? Part of somebody's outfit? or
was there a shipwreck close at hand?"

"It's a man--most likely a tenderfoot, if he tried to walk across this
'ere desert."

The two halted, and Dick Stevens's life was saved.

Had the storm lasted two or three minutes longer, or these prospectors
gone in any other direction, he must have died where he had fallen.

Now he was dragged out from beneath the weight of sand, and laid upon
a blanket, while the men, knowing by experience what should be done in
such cases, set about restoring the boy to consciousness.

Thanks to the timely attention, Dick soon opened his eyes, stared
around him for an instant in bewilderment, and then exclaimed as he
made a vain attempt to rise,--

"I come pretty near knockin' under, didn't I? The last I remember was
of fallin'."

"I allow it was the closest shave you'll ever have agin," Parsons
replied grimly; "an' I'm free to say that them as are sich fools as to
cross this 'ere sand-barren afoot oughter stay on it, like as you were
in a fair way of doin' before we come along."

"An' that's what daddy would say, I s'pose. If he'd known what I was
goin' to do, there would have been a stop put to it, even though it
was to save his life I came."

"How can you save anybody's life by comin' out in sich a tom-fool way
as this? Less than a quart of water, and not so much as a blanket with
which to protect yourself."

"I can do it by goin' to Antelope Spring an' findin' a doctor," Dick
replied. "You see, daddy shot himself in the leg--stove a bone all to
pieces; and mother don't know what to do, so I slid off this mornin'
without tellin' anybody."

"Countin' on footin' it to Antelope Spring?" Parsons asked as if in
surprise.

"Yes; it ain't more'n forty-five miles the way we've reckoned it."

"Where did you start from?"

"Buffalo Meadows."

"And when did you count on makin' that forty-five miles?"

"I allowed to get there before midnight."

"Where's your camp?"

"Well, we haven't got anything you can rightly call a camp; but we're
located in a prairie schooner near by the spring in the valley."

"How many in the party?"

"Daddy, mother, an' Margie."

The two men looked at Dick an instant, and then glanced at each other,
after which Parsons said emphatically,--

"The boy has got grit; but the old man must have been way off to come
through this section of the country in a wagon."

Dick explained how it was they chanced to be travelling, and then,
eager to gain all the information possible, asked,--

"Do you know anything about Antelope Spring?"

"Nothin' good. There's a settlement by that name; but it's a
no-account place."

"I s'pose I'll find a doctor?"

"I reckon they've got somethin' of the kind hangin' 'round. But are
you countin' on draggin' one down to Buffalo Meadows?"

"I don't expect to be so lucky. But mother seemed to have the idea
that if somebody who knew all about it would tell her how to take care
of daddy's wound, she'd get along with such stuff as I could fetch to
help him out in the fever. Say, I don't reckon either of you wants to
buy a good rifle? There ain't a better one on Humboldt River;" and as
he spoke Dick unslung the weapon which hung at his back.

"What's your idea in sellin' the gun? It strikes me, if you're
countin' on pullin' through from Buffalo Meadows to Willow Point,
you'll need it."

"Of course I shall; but it's got to go. You see, daddy's dead broke, an'
I must have money to pay for the doctor's stuff. I don't s'pose you
want it; but if you did, here's a good chance. If you don't buy I reckon
there'll be some one up to Antelope Spring who'll take it off my hands."

"Haven't you got anything else you can put up, instead of lettin' the
rifle go? In this section of the country a tool like that will stand a
man good agin starvation."

"It's all I own that's worth anything, an' I'll be mighty sorry to
lose it; but she's got to go."

Again the men looked at the boy, then at each other; and Parsons
motioned for his companion to follow him a short distance away, where,
to Dick's great surprise, they began an animated conversation.




CHAPTER IV.

AT ANTELOPE SPRING.


Dick was perplexed by the behavior of these two strangers. He failed
utterly to understand why they should have anything of such a private
nature to discuss that it was necessary to move aside from him; for in
a few moments they would be alone on the desert, after he had gone his
way.

The discussion, or conversation, whichever it may have been, did not
occupy many moments; but brief as was the time, Dick had turned to
continue his journey at the instant when the men rejoined him.

"What do you allow you ought to get for that rifle?" Parsons asked
abruptly.

"That's what I don't know. You see, I didn't buy it new, but traded
for her before we left home. It seems to me she ought to be a bargain
at--at--ten dollars."

"An' if you get the cash you're goin' to blow it right in for what the
doctor can tell you, an' sich stuff as he thinks your old man ought
to have eh?"

"That's what I'll do if it costs as much."

"S'posen it don't? Allow that you've got five dollars left, what then?"

"I'll buy flour, an' bacon, an' somethin' for mother an' Margie with
the balance."

"Do you mean to tell me your father was sich a tenderfoot as to come
down through this way without any outfit?" Robinson asked sternly.

"He had plenty at the time we started; but you see we struck bad luck
all the way along, and when we pulled into Buffalo Meadows we had
cooked the last pound of flour. There wasn't even a bit of meat in the
camp when he got shot. I knocked over a deer last night, an' that will
keep 'em goin' till I get back."

"An' a kid like you is supportin' a family, eh?" Parsons asked in a
kindly tone.

"I don't know what kind of a fist I'm goin' to make of it; but that's
what I'll try to do till daddy gets on his feet again. Say, how long
do you s'pose it'll take a man to get well when one leg is knocked
endways with a bullet plum through the bone of it?"

"It'll be quite a bit, I'm thinkin'--too long for you to stay in
Buffalo Meadows at this time of the year. Two months ought to do it,
eh, Parsons?"

"Well, yes; he won't get 'round any quicker than that."

"I don't know as it makes much difference if he can't walk a great
deal, 'cause after the horses have had plenty of grass for a couple of
weeks we'll pull across this place; an' once on the other side I
sha'n't worry but what I can take 'em through all right."

"Look here, my son," Robinson said, as he laid his hand on the lad's
shoulder. "You've got plenty of sand, that's a fact. I allow there
ain't a kid within a thousand miles of here that would tackle the
contract you've taken this mornin'. If we wasn't bound to the
Winnemucca Range, an it wasn't quite so late in the season, we'd help
you out by goin' down to camp an' straightenin' things a bit; but it
can't be done now. We'll buy your rifle though, an' that's what we've
agreed on. Ten dollars ain't sich a big pile for the gun; but yet it's
plenty enough--leastways, it's all we can afford to put out just now."

"I'll be mighty glad to sell it for that if you need a rifle; an'
it'll be better to make the trade now than wait till I get into
Antelope Spring, 'cause there's no dead certainty I'll find anybody
there who'll buy it."

Parsons took from a buckskin bag a small roll of bills, and when he
had counted out ten dollars there was but little of the original
amount remaining.

He handed the money to Dick; and the latter, after the briefest
hesitation, held the rifle toward him.

"Sorry to give it up, eh?" Robinson asked.

"Well, I ain't when it comes to gettin' the money for daddy; if it
wasn't for that I'd be. You see, it's the first one I ever owned, an'
the way things look now, it'll be a good while before I get another."

"I'll tell you how we'll fix it, son. My partner an' I ain't needin'
an extra rifle just now; an' more than as likely as not--in fact, I
may say it's certain--we'll be up 'round your way before the winter
fairly sets in. Now, if you could keep it for us till then, it would
be the biggest kind of a favor, 'cause you see we're prospecting an'
have got about all the load the burros can tackle."

"You're--you're--sure you want to buy this gun, eh?"

"Well, if we wasn't, there wouldn't have been much sense in makin' the
talk."

"But if you're prospectors, there isn't any show of your gettin'
'round to Willow Point."

"Oh, we drift up an' down, here an' there, just as the case may be.
There ain't any question about our trailin' all over the State in
time, and you shall keep the rifle in good shape till we call for it.
So long, my son. It's time for you to be hoofin' it, if you count on
gettin' to Antelope Spring this side of to-morrow mornin'."

As he spoke, Parsons mounted his pony, Robinson following the example;
and in another moment the two were on their way once more, leaving
Dick in a painful state of uncertainty regarding their purpose in
purchasing the gun.

During two or three minutes the boy stood where they had left him, and
then cried,--

"Hello there! Hold on a minute, will you?"

"What's the matter now?" and Parsons looked over his shoulder, but
neither he nor his partner reined in their steeds.

"Are you buyin' this rifle? or are you makin' believe so's to give me
the ten dollars?"

"S'posen we was makin' believe?"

"Why then I wouldn't take the money, 'cause I ain't out begging."

"Don't fret yourself, my son. We've bought the gun all right; an' the
next time we meet, you can hand it over. I wish our pile had been bigger
so's we could have given twenty, 'cause a kid like you deserves it."

The horsemen continued on, and by this time were so far away that Dick
would have been unwise had he attempted to overtake them.

He stood irresolutely an instant as if doubtful of the genuineness of
this alleged business transaction.

It was as if the men feared he might attempt to overtake them; for
despite the heavy loads on the burros they urged the beasts forward at
their best pace, and Dick was still revolving the matter in his mind
when they were a mile or more away.

"Well, it's no use for me to stand here tryin' to figure out whether
they've given me this money or really mean to buy the rifle, for I've
got to strike Antelope Spring between this time an' midnight. Now that
there are ten dollars in my pocket, I'll be a pretty poor stick if I
don't do it; but the sand-storm came mighty near windin' me up. It was
the toughest thing I ever saw."

Then Dick set forward once more, toiling over the loose surface into
which his feet sank three or four inches at every step; and when he
finally stood on the firm soil east of this waste of shifting sand, it
was two hours past noon.

As he had reckoned, there were more than thirty miles yet to be
traversed; but the distance troubled him little.

He had in his possession that which would buy such knowledge and such
drugs as his father might need, and he believed it would be almost a
sin to rebel even in his thoughts against the labor which must be
performed.

Now he advanced, whistling cheerily, with a long stride and a swinging
gait that should have carried him over the trail at the rate of four
miles an hour; and not until late in the afternoon did he permit
himself to halt, and partake of the broiled venison.

Then he ate every morsel, and, the meal finished, said aloud with a
low laugh of perfect content:--

"It's lucky I didn't bring any more; for I should eat it to a dead
certainty, an' then I wouldn't be in as good trim for walkin'. Daddy
always says that the less a fellow has in his stomach the easier he
can get over the ground, and the poor old man never struck it truer."

After this halt of fifteen minutes Dick pressed forward without more
delay until he came upon the settlement, at what time he knew not, but
to the best of his belief it was hardly more than an hour past midnight.

There was no thought in his mind of spending any portion of the money
for a bed.

The earth offered such a resting-place as satisfied him; and since the
day his father departed from Willow Point in the hope of finding a
location where he could earn a livelihood with but little labor, Dick
had more often slept upon the ground than elsewhere.

Now he threw himself down by the side of a storehouse, or shed, where
he would be protected from the night wind; and there was hardly more
than time to compose himself for rest before his eyes were closed in
slumber.

No person in Antelope Spring was awake at an earlier hour next morning
than Dick Stevens; for the sun had not yet shown himself when the boy
arose to his feet, and looked around as if to say that he was in fine
condition.

"A tramp of forty-five miles ain't to be sneezed at, an' when you
throw in fifteen miles of desert an' a sand-storm to boot, it's what I
call a pretty good day's work; yet I'm feelin' fine as a fiddle," he
said in a tone of satisfaction, after which he made an apology for a
toilet at the stream near-by.

Dick had no idea in which direction a physician might be found;
therefore he halted in front of the first store he saw to wait until
the proprietor came, half an hour later, to attend to customers.

It was such a shop as one would naturally expect to find in a
settlement among the mountains of Nevada.

From molasses to perfumery, and from ploughs to fish-hooks, the
assortment ran, until one would say all his wants might be supplied
from the stock.

Cheese was what Dick had decided upon for his morning meal; and after
purchasing two pounds, together with such an amount of crackers as he
thought would be necessary, he set about eating breakfast at the same
time that he gained the desired information.

"I've come from the other side of Smoke Creek Desert," he began,
speaking indistinctly because of the fulness of his mouth, "an' want
to find a doctor."

"Ain't sick, are yer?" the shopkeeper asked with mild curiosity.

"Daddy shot himself in the leg, an' mother don't know what to do for
him; so I've come up to hire a doctor to tell me, an' buy whatever he
says is needed."

"A kid like you come across the desert! Where's your pony?"

"I haven't got any. Daddy's horses are so nearly played out that
they've got to be left to grass two or three weeks, if we count on
doin' anything with 'em."

"Did you walk across?" the shopkeeper asked incredulously.

"That's what I did;" and Dick told of his sufferings during the
sand-storm, not in a boastful way, but as if it were his purpose to
give the prospectors the praise they deserved.

When he had concluded, the proprietor plunged his hands deep in his
pockets, surveyed the boy from head to foot much as Parsons and
Robinson had, saying not a word until Dick's face reddened under the
close scrutiny, when he exclaimed,--

"Well, I'll be jiggered! A kid of your size--say, how old are you, bub?"

"Thirteen."

"Well, a baby of thirteen lightin' out across Smoke Creek Desert, an'
all for the sake of helpin' your dad, eh? Do you reckon you can bite
out of Dr. Manter's ear all you want to know, an' then go back an' run
the business?"

"It seems as if he ought to tell me what mother needs to do, an' I can
remember every word. Then she said there would have to be some
medicine to stop the fever; an' that's what I'm countin' on buyin', if
he gives me the name of it."

"When are you goin' back?"

"I'm in hopes to get away this noon, an' then I'll be in camp by
to-morrow mornin'."

"Say, sonny, do you want to stuff me with the yarn that you've
travelled forty-five miles in less'n thirty-six hours, an' count on
doin' the same thing right over agin, which is ninety miles in less'n
three days?"

"I've done the first half of the journey, an' it couldn't have been
more'n two hours past midnight when I got here. With such a lay-out as
this for breakfast I'll be in good shape for goin' back; an' it would
be a mighty poor boy who couldn't get there between this noon an'
to-morrow mornin', 'cause I'll go across the desert after dark, an' it
ain't likely there'll be another sand-storm."

"Well, look here, sonny, stand right there for a minute, will you,
while I go out? I won't be gone a great while, an' you can finish up
your breakfast."

"But I want to see the doctor as soon as I can, you know."

"That'll be all right. I'll make it in my way to help you along so you
sha'n't be kept in this town a single hour more'n 's necessary."

Having said this, and without waiting to learn whether his young and
early customer was willing to do as he had requested, the proprietor
of the store hurriedly left the building, and Dick had finished his
meal before he returned.

The boy was stowing the remainder of the cheese and crackers into his
pockets when the shopkeeper, accompanied by two men, who looked as if
they might have been hunters or miners, entered.

"Is this the kid?" one of the strangers asked, looking as curiously at
the boy as had the proprietor.

"That's the one; an' the yarn he tells must be pretty nigh true, 'cause
he met Parsons an' Robinson, an' accordin' to his story they bought his
rifle, leavin' it with him till such time as they want to claim it."

The newcomers questioned Dick so closely regarding the journey and its
purpose that he began to fear something was wrong, and asked
nervously,--

"What's the reason I shouldn't have come up here? When a feller's
father is goin' to die if he can't get a doctor afoul of him, it's a
case of hustlin' right sharp."

"An' accordin' to the account you've given, that's about what you've
been doin'," one of the strangers said with an approving nod, which
reassured the boy to such an extent that he answered without
hesitation the further questions which were asked.

When the curiosity of the men had been satisfied, one of those whom
the landlord had brought in, and who was addressed by his companions
as "Bob Mason," said to Dick, as he laid his hand on the boy's
shoulder,--

"We'll take care of you, my bold kid, an' see that you get all your
father needs. If it wasn't that the doctor in this 'ere town is worked
mighty hard, I'd make it my business to send him right down to your
camp. But I reckon, if it's nothin' more'n a bullet through your dad's
leg, he'll pull 'round all right with sich things as you can carry
from here. Now come on, an' we'll find out what the pill-master thinks
of the case."

Dick was thoroughly surprised that so much interest in his affairs
should be manifested by strangers, and it pleased him that he was to
have assistance in this search for medical knowledge.

He followed this new friend readily, and in a few moments was standing
before the doctor, listening to Mr. Mason's highly colored version of
the journey.

When he would have corrected the gentleman as to some of the points
which had been exaggerated, he was kindly bade to "hold his tongue."

"I've heard all your yarn, my boy, an' can imagine a good many things
you didn't tell. There's precious few of us in this section of the
country that was ever overtook, while on foot, by the dancin' giants,
an' lived to tell the story."

"I wouldn't be alive if it hadn't been for Mr. Parsons an' Mr.
Robinson."

"What they did don't cut any figger. It's what you went through with
that I'm talkin' about, an' the doctor is bound to hear the whole
story before he gives up what he knows."

Not until Mr. Mason had concluded the recital after his own fashion
did he give the professional gentleman an opportunity to impart the
information which Dick had worked so hard to obtain; and then the
physician, after telling him in a general way how the patient should
be treated, wrote out in detail instructions for Mrs. Stevens to follow.

Then from his store of drugs, pills, and nauseous potions he selected
such as might be needed in the case, writing on each package full
directions, at the expense of at least an hour's time; and when he had
finished, Dick believed that his father would suffer for nothing in
the way of medicine.

"There, lad," Dr. Manter said as he concluded his labors, and tied in
the smallest possible compass the articles he had set out, "I allow
your mother should be able to do all that is necessary; and unless the
bone is so shattered that the leg must be amputated, it is possible
you will get along as well without a physician as with one."

"Do you mean there's a chance my poor old man might have to let his
leg be cut off?"

"If you have described the wound correctly, I should say there was
every danger. I have written, however, to your mother, so that she may
be able to decide if anything of the kind is probable, and then you
may be obliged to make another journey up here. At all events, if your
father's life should be in danger, you may depend upon it I will come
to the camp; although I am free to admit that a ride across Smoke
Creek Desert isn't one that I hanker for, although you seem to have
made the journey on foot and thought little of it."

"That's 'cause I was doin' it on daddy's account. How much is your
price for this stuff?"

Mr. Mason instantly plunged his hand in his pocket; and before he
could withdraw it the physician replied,--

"You have earned all I've given you, lad; and I'd be ashamed to take
even a dollar from a plucky little shaver like you."

"But I've got ten dollars, an' can pay my way. If I'd thought the
prospectors meant to give me the money instead of buyin' the rifle,
I'd got along without it; but they said twice over that they wanted
the gun, an' I believed 'em."

"No one can accuse you of being a beggar; but if it's the same to
you, I'd rather let this go on account, and some day perhaps, when
you've struck it rich, come around and we'll have a settlement."

"Doctor, you're a man, every inch of you!" Mr. Mason said in a loud
tone, as he slapped the physician on the shoulder with a force that
caused him to wince with absolute pain. "You're a man; an' if the
people in this town don't know it already, they shall find it out from
yours truly. I reckon we can ante up a little something in this 'ere
matter, so the kid won't go home empty-handed; for I tell you there's
nothin' in Antelope Spring too good for him."

Again Dick looked about him in surprise that such praise should be
bestowed for what seemed to him a very simple act. The kindly manner
in which the physician bade him good-by, with the assurance that he
would himself go to Buffalo Meadows if it should become necessary,
served to increase the boy's astonishment; and instead of thanking the
gentleman, he could only say, because of his bewilderment,--

"I did it for daddy, sir; an' it would be a mean kind of fellow who
wouldn't do as much."

Then Mr. Mason hurried him away, and despite Dick's protests insisted
on leading him from one place to another, until it was as if he had
been introduced to every citizen in the settlement.

He was not called upon to tell his story again, because his conductor
did that for him; and the details of the narrative were magnified with
each repetition, until Dick believed it absolutely necessary he should
contradict certain portions wherein he was depicted as a hero of the
first class.

When Mr. Mason had shown the boy fully around the town, he said by way
of parting,--

"Now you go down to Mansfield's, an' wait there till I come."

"Where's Mansfield's?"

"That's the store where I found you."

"But I can't wait a great while, Mr. Mason. You know I've got to be
back by to-morrow mornin'; an' I ought to be leavin' now, 'cause it's
pretty near noon."

"Don't worry your head about that, my son. You shall get to camp
before sunrise to-morrow mornin', an' without so very much work on
your part, either. Now go down to Mansfield's, an' wait there till I
come. Mind you don't leave this town till I'm back there."

Mr. Mason hurried away as he ceased speaking; and Dick walked slowly
down the street, debating in his mind whether he must obey this order.




CHAPTER V.

DICK "PULLS THROUGH."


When Dick had retraced his steps to Mansfield's he found no less than
ten of the citizens there, several of whom he had already met; and all
were evidently eager to talk with the boy who had walked across Smoke
Creek Desert.

There were but few in that section of the country who would have dared
to make the venture, although it was by no means a dangerous or
difficult journey for a horseman; and Dick's bravery, in connection
with all the circumstances, pleased the citizens of Antelope Spring
wonderfully well.

The package Dick carried told that he had been successful in finding a
physician, and Mr. Mansfield was curious to learn how much the medical
gentleman had charged for his services.

"He wouldn't take a cent," Dick said in reply to the question. "It
seems to me the folks in this town are mighty good."

"I don't reckon we'll ever be hung for our goodness," the proprietor of
the shop said with a grin; "but it is considerable of a treat to see a
kid with so much sand as you've shown. Dr. Manter knew which side his
bread was buttered on when he wouldn't take your money; an' if your
father don't get better with what you're takin' to him, you can count on
Manter seein' the thing through. You've got quite a load, my son."

"Yes; an' I'm countin' on carryin' more, if you'll take money for what
I buy. I don't want to set myself up for a beggar, 'cause I've got the
stuff to pay for everything."

"What do you want?"

"About ten pounds of flour, and the same weight in bacon or salt pork,
with a little pepper and salt, will be as much as I can carry."

"It's a good deal more'n I'd want to tote forty-five miles 'twixt now
and sunset," one of the visitors remarked; and Dick replied cheerily,--

"It wouldn't seem very heavy if you was carryin' it to your folks
who'd had nothin' but fresh meat to eat for the last month. Mother and
Margie will be wild when I bring in that much."

"I'll put up twenty-five pounds in all, for I reckon there are other
things that would come handy," Mr. Mansfield said as he began to weigh
out the articles, and Dick asked quickly,--

"You're to let me pay for 'em?"

"Sure," the proprietor replied as he winked at the loungers. "You
shall give all the stuff is worth."

"I didn't want to hang 'round here very long; but Mr. Mason said I was
to wait for him."

"If Bob Mason give sich orders it'll be worth your while to stop a
spell; for he's as cross-grained as a broncho when matters don't go to
his likin', an' might make trouble for you."

Dick was considerably disturbed by this remark, which had much the
sound of a threat, and looked out of the door uneasily.

The citizens had been exceedingly kind to him; but he had had no
little experience with inhabitants of frontier towns, and knew that
friendship might be changed to enmity very suddenly.

The shopkeeper had not finished filling the small order when Bob Mason
rode up on a wiry-looking broncho, and after tying the beast to a
hitching-post, entered the store.

"I had an idea that was what you were up to," one of the loungers
said; and Mason replied with a laugh,--

"When we have sich a visitor as this 'ere kid, I reckon we're called
on to make things pleasant for him." Then turning to Dick he added,
"If it so be your daddy pulls through all right for the next week or
ten days, he should be in condition to ride this far?"

"After the horses have rested a little I counted on starting for
Willow Point."

"It strikes me that would be too rough a journey for the old man at
this time of the year. We're needin' kids like you in this town, an' I
allow you'll find a shelter here till spring. Then, if the settlement
don't suit you, it'll be only a case of goin' on when the travellin'
is easier."

"Do you mean that we'd better live here?" Dick asked in surprise.

"That's the way some of us have figgered it."

"Can I find work enough to pay our way? You see, daddy won't be in
shape to do anything for quite a spell."

"I'll give you a job on my ranch, an' pay fair wages."

"Then we'll be glad to stop."

"All right, my son. You shall take your own time about comin', and
I'll hold the job open till you get here. Now I'm allowin' to lend you
that broncho, so you can get back in case the old man grows worse.
He's a tricky beast; but I reckon you'll handle him without any too
much trouble. The only drawback is that I can't furnish a saddle."

"If you can spare the pony, I'll get along without the fixings," Dick
replied, his eyes gleaming with delight; for with such a steed he
would be able to visit the town at short notice, if it should become
necessary.

"I'm allowin' that I've got a saddle he can have for a spell," Mr.
Mansfield replied thoughtfully; and although Dick insisted that there
was really no need of one, it was brought out.

The loungers took it upon themselves to see that the broncho was
properly harnessed; and now that it was no longer necessary to limit
the weight of the supplies, the shopkeeper suggested that the amount
of flour and bacon be doubled.

"Will ten dollars be enough to pay for it?" Dick asked.

"We'll make a charge of it, seein's you're goin' to work for Bob
Mason. You can give me an order on him after you've been here a spell,
an' it'll be the same thing as cash."

"Now you're doin' the square thing, Mansfield," Mason said
approvingly; and despite Dick's protests that he preferred to pay his
way so long as he had the money, the matter was thus arranged.

"You are sure I can earn enough to pay for what we'll need to eat
between now and spring?" the boy asked doubtfully.

"I'm allowing from what I've seen, that you'll earn a man's wages, an'
that'll be thirty dollars a month. If your father is anything like
you, I'll guarantee he can find work enough to support the family; an'
Antelope Spring is needin' settlers mighty bad."

The supply of provisions and the medicines were packed in a bag,
divided into two portions of equal weight that they might be carried
over the saddle, and then Dick was ready to mount.

He realized fully how kind the people of the town had been to him, and
was eager to say that which should give token of the gratitude in his
heart; but the words refused to come at his bidding.

He stammered in the attempt to speak, cleared his throat nervously,
and tried again,--

"You've been mighty good, all hands, an' I'm thinkin' it'll help daddy
pull through. I wish--I wish"--

"That's all right, my son," Bob Mason interrupted. "We've got a good
idea of what you want to say, an' you can let it go at that. As a
general thing we don't get stuck on kids; but when one flashes up in
the style you have, we cotton to him mightily. You can push that 'ere
broncho right along, for forty-five miles ain't any terrible big job
for him, an' canter into camp this side of midnight with considerable
time to spare."

"I thank you all, an' so will mother an' daddy when they get here," he
said in a husky tone, as he mounted; and then waving his cap by way of
adieu, he rode away, the happiest boy to be found on either side of
the Rocky Mountains.

Night had not fully come when he halted at the eastern edge of the
desert to give the broncho water and grass; and here he remained an
hour, the crackers and cheese left from breakfast affording an
appetizing supper to a lad who had known but little variation in his
bill of fare from fresh meat, broiled or stewed, more often without
salt or pepper.

The stars guided him on the course across the waste of sand, and the
pony made his way over the yielding surface at a pace which surprised
the rider.

"He can walk four miles an hour, according to this showing, and I
should be in camp before ten o'clock."

In this he was not mistaken. The broncho pushed ahead rapidly, proving
that he had traversed deserts before, and was eager to complete the
journey; and when Dick came within sight of the wagon, his mother was
standing in front of the camp-fire, so intent on broiling a slice of
venison that she was ignorant of his coming until he shouted cheerily,--

"Here I am, mother dear, coming along with a good bit of style, and so
many fine things that you'll open your eyes mighty wide when this bag
is emptied. How is my poor old man?"

He had dismounted as he ceased speaking, and was instantly clasped in
his mother's arms.

"O Dick, Dick, how sore my heart has been! Your father said you could
not get across the desert on foot, and I have pictured you lying on
the sands dying."

"You've made your pictures all wrong, dearie; for here I am in prime
condition, and loaded down with good things. The people up at Antelope
Spring have shown themselves to be mighty generous. How is daddy?"

"He is resting comfortably just now, although he has suffered
considerable pain. Did you see a doctor?"

"Yes; an' am loaded way up to the muzzle with directions as to what
must be done. Let's go in and see the poor old man, an' then I'll tell
you both the story."

Mr. Stevens's voice was heard from the inside of the wagon as he spoke
Dick's name; Margie clambered out, her big brown eyes heavy with
slumber, to greet her brother, and the boy was forced to receive her
caresses before it was possible to care for the broncho.

Then, as soon as might be, Dick entered the wagon, and the hand-clasp
from his father was sufficient reward for all his sufferings in the
desert.

It was midnight before he finished telling of his journey, and
reception by the men of Antelope Spring.

He would have kept secret the peril which came to him with the
sand-storm; but his father questioned him so closely that it became
necessary to go into all the details, and more than once before the
tale was concluded did his mother press him lovingly to her as she
wiped the tears from her eyes.

"You mustn't cry now it is all over," he said with a smile, as he
returned the warm pressure of her hand. "I'm none the worse for havin'
been half buried, an' we're rich. I'm countin' on pullin' out of here
as soon as the horses are in condition; an' we'll stay at the town
till spring--perhaps longer."

Although he claimed that he was not hungry, his mother insisted on
preparing supper from the seemingly ample store of provisions; and
when the meal had been eaten it was so nearly morning that Dick would
have dispensed with the formality of going to bed, but that his mother
declared it was necessary he should gain some rest.

His heart was filled with thankfulness when he lay down under the
wagon again, covered with a blanket; and perhaps for the first time in
his life Dick did more than repeat the prayer his mother taught him,
for he whispered very softly,--

"You've been mighty good to me, God, an' I hope you're goin' to let my
poor old man have another whack at livin'."

Dick had repeated to his mother all the instructions given him by the
physician, and before he was awake next morning Mrs. Stevens set about
dressing the wound in a more thorough manner than had ever been
possible before.

She was yet engaged in this task when the boy opened his eyes, and
learning to his surprise that the day was at least an hour old, sprang
to his feet like one who has been guilty of an indiscretion.

"What! up already?" he cried in surprise, as looking through the flap
of the wagon-covering, he saw what his mother was doing.

"Yes, Dick dear, and I have good news for you. Both your father and I
now think he was mistaken in believing the bone was shattered by the
bullet. Perhaps it is splintered some, but nothing more serious."

"Then you won't be obliged to have it cut off, daddy, an' should be
able to get round right soon."

"There's this much certain, Dick, whether the bone is injured or not,
my life has been saved through your efforts; for I know enough about
gun-shot wounds to understand that I couldn't have pulled through
without something more than we were able to get here."

"Yet you would have prevented me from leaving if I had told you what
was in my mind."

"I should for a fact; because if one of us two must go under, it would
be best for mother an' Margie that I was that one."

"Why, daddy! you have no right to talk like that!"

"It's true, Dick. I've been a sort of ne'er-do-well, otherwise I
wouldn't have been called Roving Dick, while you are really the head
of the house."

"I won't listen to such talk, daddy; for it sounds as if you were out of
your head again, as when we were alone that night. You'll perk up after
we're at Antelope Spring, an' show the people there what you can do."

"I shall be obliged to work very hard in order to make a good showing
by the side of you."

Dick hurried away, for it pained him to hear his father talk in such
fashion; yet at the same time he hoped most fervently that there would
be no more roaming in search of a place where the least possible
amount of labor was necessary, and it really seemed as if "Roving
Dick" had made up his mind to lead a different life.

There was little opportunity for the boy to remain idle.

The supplies he had brought from Mr. Mansfield's shop would not
suffice to provide the family with food many days unless it was
re-enforced by fresh meat; and as soon as Dick had seen to it that the
horses and the broncho were safe, he made preparations for a
hunting-trip.

When breakfast had been eaten, and how delicious was the taste of
bacon and flour-bread to this little party, which had been deprived of
such food so long, he started off, returning at night-fall with a
small deer and half a dozen rabbits.

The greater portion of the venison he cut up ready for smoking; and
when his mother asked why he was planning so much labor for himself,
he replied cheerily,--

"We're likely to lay here ten days at the very least, for the horses
won't be in condition to travel in much less time; and now is my
chance to put in a stock of provisions for the winter. It never'll do
to spend all my wages for food; because you and Margie are to be
fitted out in proper shape, and now I haven't even the rifle to sell,
for that belongs to the prospectors."

Not an idle hour did Dick Stevens spend during the time they remained
encamped at Buffalo Meadows; and when the time came that his father
believed they might safely begin the journey to Antelope Spring, he had
such a supply of smoked meat as would keep the family in food many days.

Mr. Stevens's wound had healed with reasonable rapidity, thanks to the
materials for its dressing which Dick had risked his life to procure;
and on the morning they decided to cross the desert the invalid was
able to take his place on the front seat of the wagon to play the part
of driver.

Dick rode the broncho, as a matter of course; and to him this journey
was most enjoyable.

Not until the second day did the family arrive at their destination, and
Dick received such a reception as caused his cheeks to redden with joy.

Bob Mason chanced to be in front of Mansfield's store when the party
rode up, and insisted on their remaining there until he could summon
the inhabitants of the settlement to give them welcome.

"We're glad you've come," Mr. Mason said when he believed the time had
come for him to make a speech. "We've seen the kid, an' know how much
sand he's got; so if the rest of the family are anything like him, and I
reckon they must be, we're gettin' the kind of citizens we hanker after.
I've pre-empted the boy, an' allow he'll look out for things on the
ranch as well as any man I could hire, an' a good deal better'n the
average run. We've got a house here for the rest of you, an' Stevens
will find plenty of work if he's handy with tools. Now then, kid, we'll
get the old folks settled, an' after that I'll yank you off with me."

Mason led the way to a rude shanty of boards, which was neither the best
nor the worst dwelling in the town; and to Mrs. Stevens and Margie it
seemed much like a palace, for it was a place they could call home, a
pleasure they had not enjoyed since leaving Willow Point two years ago.

Dick observed with satisfaction that there was a sufficient amount of
furniture in the shanty to serve his parents until money could be
earned with which to purchase more; and then he rode away with Bob
Mason, leading the team-horses to that gentleman's corral.

He had brought his family to a home, and had before him a good
prospect of supplying them with food, even though his father should
not be able to do any work until the coming spring; therefore Dick
Stevens was a very happy boy.

Here we will leave him; for he is yet in Mason's employ, and it is said
in Antelope Spring to-day, or was a few months ago, that when "Bob Mason
hired that kid to oversee his ranch, he knew what he was about."

It is hard to believe that a boy only fifteen years of age (for Dick
has _now_ been an overseer, or "boss puncher" as it is termed in
Nevada, nearly two years) could care for a ranch of six hundred acres;
yet he has done it, as more than one can testify, and in such a
satisfactory manner that next year he is to have an interest in the
herds and flocks on the "Mason Place."

Mr. Stevens recovered from the wound in due time; and early in the
spring after his arrival at the settlement, he joined Messrs. Parsons
& Robinson in prospecting among the ranges.

His good fortune was even greater than Dick's; for before the winter
came again the firm had struck a rich lead of silver, which has been
worked with such profit that "Roving Dick's" home is one of the best
and the cosiest to be found in the State.

Mr. Stevens would have been glad had young Dick decided to give up his
work on the ranch; but the latter has declared again and again that he
will leave mining strictly alone, because "cattle are good enough for
him."

THE END.




[Transcriber's Note:


* Pg 24 Added opening quotes before "I went, an' have got back".

* Otherwise, archaic and inconsistent spelling and hyphenation
retained.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dick in the Desert, by James Otis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DICK IN THE DESERT ***

***** This file should be named 31556-8.txt or 31556-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/5/31556/

Produced by David Edwards, Larry B. Harrison and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
